Intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease: the importance
and difficulty of a differential diagnosis

Esther Merino-Gallego, Francisco Gallardo-Sánchez and Francisco Javier Gallego-Rojo

Department of Digestive Diseases. Hospital de Poniente. El Ejido, Almería. Spain

Received: 25/07/2017 · Accepted: 11/04/2018

Correspondence: Esther Merino-Gallego. Department of Digestive Diseases. Hospital de Poniente. Carretera de
Almerimar, 31. 04700 El Ejido, Almería. e-mail: esthimg@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

Tuberculosis (TB) is the most prevalent infection worldwide
and affects one third of the population, predominantly in
developing countries. Intestinal TB (ITB) is the sixth most
frequent extra-pulmonary TB infection. Crohn’s disease
(CD) is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease that arises
from the interaction of immunological, environmental and
genetic factors. Due to changes in the epidemiology of both
diseases, distinguishing CD from ITB is a challenge, par-
ticularly in immunocompromised patients and those from
areas where TB is endemic. Furthermore, both TB and CD
have a predilection for the ileocecal area. In addition, they
share very similar clinical, radiological and endoscopic find-
ings. An incorrect diagnosis and treatment may increase
morbidity and mortality. Thus, a great degree of caution is
required as well as a familiarity with certain characteristics
of the diseases, which will aid the differentiation between
the two diseases.

Key words: Intestinal tuberculosis. Crohn’s disease. Differ-
ential diagnosis.

INTRODUCTION

Both Crohn’s Disease (CD) and intestinal tuberculosis (ITB)
are chronic granulomatous diseases that affect the gastro-
intestinal tract and present a challenge for a differential
diagnosis. Both may present similar clinical, radiological
and endoscopic findings. However, they can be differenti-
ated according to their evolution and management. There-
fore, caution is imperative in order to make a correct diag-
nosis (1).

One third of the world population is infected with TB (1),
predominantly in developing countries. It is important to
note that extra-pulmonary TB (EPTB) affects only 20% of
immunocompetent patients, while 50% of immunocompro-
mised are affected (2). Intestinal tuberculosis represents the
sixth most frequent extra-pulmonary TB and is observed in
11% of patients. Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic inflam-
matory disease of an unknown etiology that arises from
genetic, environmental and immunological factors (3). TB
is considered as a problem predominantly in developing

countries and less so in western countries. However, the
disease is changing geographically and the incidence in
developed countries has been increasing during recent
years (4,5).

According to data published in 2016 by the World Health
Organization, TB will continue to be an important pub-
lic health problem since over ten million people world-
wide are infected. The greatest incidence is in Southeast
Asia, the Americas and Africa. In Europe, the incidence is
32/100,000 inhabitants/year. Spain is considered to have a
low incidence of TB, with fewer than 20 cases/100,000/year
in 2013. However, until 2000, the incidence of TB in Spain
was far greater, up to 40 cases/100,000 inhabitants/year.
This explains the elevated frequency of latent tuberculosis
infection (LTB) in our country (12.5-33.5%) (5-7).

This  epidemiological  change  appears  to  be  due  to  the
appearance of new risk factors (both latent and active), in
addition to the historic risks such as HIV infection or other
immunocompromised conditions, as well as an increase
in immigration from areas where TB is endemic, among
others. Thus, the profile of the TB patient has changed. New
risk factors have been identified such as travel to coun-
tries with an elevated incidence and the generalized use of
immunosuppressive therapies and biological medication
(8). This is particularly important since immunosuppressive
treatments such as anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF),
thiopurine, calcineurine inhibitors, methotrexate and cor-
ticosteroids all increase the risk of TB infection (9). Other
factors such as smoking and malnutrition, which are fre-
quently seen in patients with CD, may also elevate the risk
of reactivating LTB above 10% (10).

Riestra S. et al. carried out a retrospective study in four
Spanish hospitals, comparing patients with inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) who subsequently developed TB with

Merino-Gallego E, Gallardo-Sánchez F, Gallego-Rojo FJ. Intestinal tuberculosis
and Crohn’s disease: the importance and difficulty of a differential diagnosis.
Rev Esp Enferm Dig 2018;110(10):650-657.

DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017

1130-0108/2018/110/10/650-657  •  REVISTA ESPAÑOLA DE ENFERMEDADES DIGESTIVAS
© Copyright 2018. SEPD y © ARÁN EDICIONES, S.L.

REV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657
DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017

REVIEWthose who did not. The authors observed that the main risk
factors in these patients included a recent hospitalization
(in the previous six months) and anti-TNF treatment (in the
previous 12 months). Furthermore, over half of patients
treated with anti-TNF that were subsequently diagnosed
with TB (53%) became infected a year after initiating treat-
ment (11).

Furthermore, despite the recommendations for a nation-
al TB screening of patients with IBD, cases continue to
appear, usually during treatment with anti-TNF medica-
tion. This may be due to various factors, which are mainly
non-compliance or incorrect TB screening in IBD patients
treated with biological therapies. In addition, 40-58% of TB
cases in patients receiving anti-TNF treatment in Spain had
not correctly followed the established guidelines (12). Fur-
thermore, the low sensitivity of the PPD skin test in immu-
nocompromised patients, such as those with IBD, may be
another factor. Other possible causes may be errors in clin-
ical history data collection or rare cases which appear after
a year of anti-TNF treatment, which may be due to de novo
infection (13,14).

Crohn’s  disease  is  increasing  in  countries  where TB  is
endemic and in patients that originate from these areas,
which further complicates a differential diagnosis. In recent
decades, there has been an increase in the incidence of IBD
in areas where the prevalence has historically been low,
such as Southeast Asia, Africa and Eastern Europe (8,9).

With regard to ITB, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) can
reach the intestinal mucous via the ingestion of infected
sputum in the case of concomitant, active pulmonary TB
(20-25% of cases). Also, via the ingestion of milk contam-
inated with Mycobacterium bovis, which is very rare in
developed countries due to hygiene measures and the
pasteurization of milk. Furthermore, this can occur hema-
togenously, via an active pulmonary focus or disseminated
infection. Contamination via direct contact with adjacent
organs is very rare (2,15).

With regard to the pattern of distribution, the most com-
mon site of ITB is the small intestine (33.8%), followed by
the peritoneum (30.7%), colon (22.3%), liver (14.6%) and
foregut (8.5%). It is worth noting that the terminal ileum
and ileocecal valve are the most common areas of infection,
perhaps due to their elevated concentration of mucosa-as-
sociated lymphoid tissue (MALT) (9).

CLINICAL FINDINGS

TB has been called “the great pretender” due to its abili-
ty to mimic a wide array of symptoms and a non-specific
presentation that makes a differential diagnosis difficult.
Abdominal pain, predominantly in the right iliac fossa, is
the most frequent symptom of intestinal TB (85%). Other
symptoms include weight loss (66%), fever (35-50%) and
diarrhea (20%). Intestinal perforation is rare (1-5%) and
requires an immediate surgical intervention due to the risk
of peritonitis (16,17). There are some clinical characteris-
tics that point towards intestinal TB such as asthenia, high
fever and persistent night sweats (with absence of infection
or intra-abdominal abscess), peritoneal ascites or a more
acute but slower evolution of symptoms (Table 1).

651

Table 1. Endoscopic, clinical, radiological and
histological characteristics of intestinal tuberculosis
and Crohn’s disease

Variables

Intestinal

Crohn’s

tuberculosis

disease

Endoscope

   Longitudinal aphthous stomatitis

   “Cobblestone” mucosa

   Incompetent ileocecal valve

   Stenosis and fistulas

   Contracting diverticula

   Scars and pseudopolyps

Clinical

   Diarrhea

   Rectal bleeding

   Fever

   Perianal symptoms

   Abdominal pain

Radiology

   Lymphadenopathy greater than 1 cm

   Lymph node with central necrosis

   Peritoneal ascites

   Changes in mesenteric fat

Histology

   Large, confluent granulomas

   Caseous necrosis

   Disproportionate submucosal inflammation

   Linear ulceration with clusters of

epithelioid histocytes



+++






+++







+++


+++

+++

+++

+++


+++



+++













Crohn’s disease may follow a similar symptomology with
fever, chronic diarrhea and weight loss. However, these symp-
toms are more chronic and alternate with periods of clinical
remission. The diagnosis of CD is reinforced by the presence
of fistula, an abscess, bowel obstruction, bloody stools or
perianal discomfort (16,18,19). Extra-intestinal manifestations
are normally associated with CD but must be carefully eval-
uated since TB may also present symptoms related with the
joints, eyes and skin, simulating extra-intestinal Crohn’s dis-
ease symptoms. However, the presence of primary sclerosing
cholangitis strongly suggests a diagnosis of CD (20). With
regard to the risk of perforation, in theory the risk is lower
for intestinal TB due to peritoneal fibrosis and the formation
of intestinal adherences in this area. Nevertheless, a greater
incidence of perforation in ITB has been observed (1-15%)
compared to Crohn’s disease (1.5-3%) (21-23) (Table 1).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

With regard to laboratory findings, there may be non-spe-
cific alterations such as an increase in acute phase reactants

Intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease: the importance and difficulty of a differential diagnosisREV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657 DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017652

(ESR and CRP), anemia or changes in nutritional parame-
ters such as hypoproteinemia, hipoalbuminemia or lower
transferrin saturation.

The best-known tuberculin skin test (TST) is the Mantoux
tuberculin skin test. This consists of an intradermal injection
of 0.1 ml of purified protein derivative (PPD) tuberculin in
the inner side of the forearm, which is subsequently read
after 72 hours. If the size of the induration is 5 mm or larger,
it is considered as positive (24,25).

In areas of low incidence of TB (< 10 cases per 100,000/year)
and those where the vaccination is available, a positive
Mantoux test is more likely to be a false positive. Another
drawback is the possible anergy in immunocompromised
patients, such as HIV positive patients or those undergoing
immunosuppressive treatment, which can give false nega-
tives (25). Therefore, a repeat TST within 7-10 days is advised
in IB patients undergoing immunosuppressive treatment, in
order to increase antigen reactivity, known as the booster
effect. A repeat TST within 7-10 days following a negative TST
allows a diagnosis in up to 14% of patients (14). It is import-
ant to note that the TST does not discriminate between active
and latent Mtb infection or the effects of prior vaccination
(9,19). TST produces a positive result in 50% of patients with
ITB; its diagnostic value in this context is not well known (25).

On the other hand, new laboratory techniques have been
developed, such as the IGRA (Interferon Gamma Release
Assay). This allows the detection of interferon-g produced
by lymphocytes exposed to MT. This test has a greater sen-
sitivity and specificity with respect to TST (81% and 85%,
respectively) and is associated with a lesser degree of false
negatives in immunocompromised patients (26-28). The
main advantages of IGRA tests compared to TST are the
greater objectivity in result interpretation (without the need
for a second reading) and the absence of effects due to prior
vaccination. Nevertheless, IGRA tests do not differentiate
between active and latent infection and the results may be
influenced by immunosuppressive treatments (29,30).

There are two tests currently available. The QuantiFER-
ON-TB Gold, which is licensed in the US, Europe and Japan
(Cellestis LTD, Carnegie, Australia) and T-SPOT.TB (Oxford
Inmunotec Global PLC, UK), which is licensed in Europe,
US, Japan and China. These tests use ELISSA and ELISPOT
techniques, respectively. The most frequently used in our
case is QuantiFERON-TB Gold, which has demonstrated a
sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 93%. The main advan-
tage of these tests is their elevated negative predictive val-
ue (NPV) of 91-94%, which allows us to reliably discard ITB
in the case of a negative result (30,31).

Despite the known effects of immunosuppressive drugs on
IGRA tests, the combined use of IGRA and TST improves
TB screening in CD patients undergoing immunosuppres-
sive treatment, thus increasing the number of patients
diagnosed with latent TB. Arias-Guillén et al. observed that
positive TSTs were far less common in patients treated with
two or more immunosuppressive drugs. Furthermore, the
IGRA detected ten cases of latent tuberculosis infection in
these patients that was not detected by TST (32).

Due to all these factors, CD patients undergoing immuno-
suppressive treatment (thiopurines, methotrexate and/or

corticosteroids) subsidiary to anti-TNF inhibitors should
undergo a double latent TB screening with both TST and
IGRA tests, preferably on the same day. Alternatively, cul-
tivation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis may be performed
on intestinal samples obtained via colonoscopy with a
recommended six samples from the biopsy. However, the
sensitivity of this is low, with positive results in 25-35% of
cases. Furthermore, the test takes a considerable amount
of time of 3-8 weeks, representing a low diagnostic value
(16,33).

A promising alternative solution is the use of polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) tests for Mtb (PCR-Mtb) on intestinal
mucosal samples (obtained via endoscopy or surgery) or
fecal samples. Several studies have evaluated the role of
PCR-Mtb for the diagnosis of ITB, with mixed results. Rama-
dass et al. reported a sensitivity and specificity of 79% and
88% in the analysis of fecal PCR respectively, whereas Gan
et al. reported a sensitivity and specificity of 64.1% and
100%, respectively, using PCR of intestinal mucous samples
(34,35).

Jin et al. performed a systematic review and meta-analy-
sis of nine studies and observed that the PCR-Mtb had an
elevated specificity (95%) and could differentiate between
ITB and CD. However, a negative result does not exclude
an ITB diagnosis due to the low sensitivity (47%) (36).
Another advantage of the PCR-Mtb test is the speed at
which the results are obtained, in just 48-72 hours.

The presence of anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies
(ASCA+) is typical in cases of Crohn’s disease, with an ele-
vated specificity of 83%. However, the isolated findings of
ASCA are not useful for the differential diagnosis of CD and
TB due to the low sensitivity (33%) for CD, and it may also
have similar positive results to patients with tuberculosis
(2). However, combined ASCA and IGRA testing increases
the diagnostic yield. In patients with ASCA+ and Quanti-
FERON-TB negative, the sensitivity and specificity of CD
diagnosis increases to 44.4% and 96%, respectively (37-39).

HISTOLOGICAL FINDINGS

Both Crohn’s disease and intestinal tuberculosis form part
of the granulomatous enteritis group, although the mech-
anism of the granuloma formation is different in each case.
Intestinal tuberculosis favors the use of macrophage and
lymphocytes, camouflaging it from the hosts’ immune
system. However, there is a depleted intestinal barrier and
increase in antigen permeability in CD, which produces an
exaggerated immune response with the formation of gran-
ulomas (40).

The presence of caseating granulomas has historically been the
gold standard to confirm intestinal TB. However, these symp-
toms are only found in a small proportion of patients (22-40%)
(15,41,42) and it is also possible to find non-necrotising granu-
lomas. Therefore, it is necessary to concentrate on other char-
acteristics of ITB granulomas which can be more helpful for
a differential diagnosis, such as their size, number and distri-
bution. Typically, ITB presents multiple (five or more per area),
confluent and very large (> 400 μm) granulomas (15,41). CD
presents disorganized, non-confluent and small granulomas
(< 200 μm) that affect the mucosal layer (Fig. 1).

E. Merino-Gallego et al.REV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657 DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017653

and the presence of adenopathy in the area of the right colic
artery (larger than 1 cm, either calcified or with a necrotic
center). However, the presence of symmetric thickening of
the intestinal wall, generally greater than 6 mm with trans-
mural affectation and inflammatory changes in the pericolic
fat and mesentery are more frequent in CD (6,15,18). The
presence of fistulas and abscesses is significantly more fre-
quent in patients with CD (45,46). However, there is some
controversy with regard to the usefulness of these in the
differential diagnosis, as some studies have shown a simi-
lar frequency for abscesses and fistulas in Crohn’s disease
and intestinal TB (47).

ENDOSCOPIC FINDINGS

Finally, a complete colonoscopy with ileoscopy is crucial for
a differential diagnosis as both diseases occur principally
in the ileocecal area. Generally, characteristic findings of
intestinal tuberculosis include at least four sections of the
colon with transvers ulcers and scars affected, an incom-
petent ileocecal valve and single, short stenosis with the
presence of contracting diverticula (Fig. 2).

In Crohn’s disease, however, longitudinal aphthous stomati-
tis is more frequent, with discontinuous serpiginous ulcers
(“cobblestone”), stenosis of the ileocecal valve and asso-
ciated perianal symptoms (8). One of the great advantages
of endoscopy is that it allows the sampling of the mucosa
and ulcerations, which aids a diagnosis. A minimum of six
samples of intestinal mucosa are recommended. Ho Bae
et al. initially developed an endoscopy score to differenti-



Fig. 1. A. Ziehl-Neelsen stain showing abundant acid-fast
bacilli. B. Caseating granuloma and abscessing with a
notable inflammatory infiltration of polimorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMN).

Other indicators in the diagnosis of ITB include dispropor-
tionate inflammation of the surface submucosa and the
presence of clusters of epithelioid histiocytes. The latter are
associated with higher diagnostic specificity of 94% (43).
Finally, techniques such as immunohistochemistry (IHC) to
identify markers such as CD73 may also be useful. CD73 is
expressed in the mesenchymal stem cells that surround the
granulomas formed by ITB. They are not present in those
related with CD (44).

RADIOLOGICAL FINDINGS

With regard to image diagnosis, a CT scan of the thorax
is essential. This will show findings that are typical of con-
comitant pulmonary TB in up to 25% of cases. Neverthe-
less, a normal thoracic CT scan does not rule out intestinal
TB. Image findings are similar in both Crohn’s disease and
intestinal tuberculosis. However, there are characteristics
that may aid their differentiation. Therefore, an abdominal
CT scan is recommended which assists in the evaluation of
the extent of the disease, as well as the degree of affecta-
tion of other organs and structures such as the mesentery,
peritoneum and lymph nodes.

The diagnosis of intestinal TB is strongly supported by cer-
tain characteristics such as the asymmetric thickening of the
intestinal wall (generally less than 6 mm), peritoneal ascites

Fig. 2. Deep, transverse geographic ulcers in a patient
with intestinal tuberculosis.

Intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease: the importance and difficulty of a differential diagnosisREV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657 DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017654

ate between intestinal TB and Crohn’s disease, obtaining a
sensitivity for CD of 65% and 97.5% for TB. The authors also
proposed the validation of a new combined score based not
only on endoscopy but also on radiological and laboratory
findings, which increased the diagnostic precision to 96.3%.
This is very useful for the differential diagnosis of Crohn’s
disease and intestinal tuberculosis. Each parameter counts
as one point in the case of CD or one point is deducted if
it is compatible with intestinal TB. The expected probability
of CD with 0-2 points was above 90% (48).

TREATMENT

Finally, treatment strategies vary significantly in both dis-
eases.  Corticosteroids,  immunosuppressive  drugs  and
biological agents are used in Crohn’s disease. The latter
has been associated with a significant risk of reactivating
latent TB, possibly leading to extra-pulmonary infection and
drastically worsening the prognosis. The use of anti-tuber-
cular therapy in Crohn’s disease also delays optimal man-
agement and increases the rate of antibiotic resistance.
For this reason, screening for latent TB is widely recom-
mended prior to commencing anti-TNF treatment (4). The
use of corticosteroids and anti-TNF alfa medication is also
associated with an increased risk of intestinal perforation in
patients with intestinal TB. The role of corticosteroids in the
treatment of TB is controversial. However, it is recommend-
ed in cases of pericardial tuberculosis and tuberculous
meningitis, where a reduction in mortality and morbidity
has been demonstrated in both cases (49). For all these rea-
sons it is vitally important to wait for complementary test
results and remain circumspect with regard to the diagnosis
of high risk patients and those suspected of having TB. It is
also important to avoid the use of systemic corticosteroids
based exclusively on endoscopic findings. When an intes-
tinal tuberculosis diagnosis is confirmed, the treatment of
choice is antibiotics (isoniazid, rifampicin) for the first two
months, followed by pyrazinamide and ethambutol for the
following four months.

Epstein et al. proposed a possible diagnostic-therapeutic
treatment algorithm for patients with inflamed ileal conduit
or ileocecal valve, where histological and microbiological
results were inconclusive due to the absence of caseating
granulomas or BAAR in intestinal biopsy. Particularly, in
immunocompromised patients or those originating from a
country where TB is endemic. When there is an elevated sus-
picion of intestinal TB based on the clinical and endoscopic
findings, it is particularly important to take into account
the epidemiological circumstances of the patient and their
history in addition to the radiological findings. This includes
previous TB, active pulmonary TB with thoracic lesions, HIV
infection and a positive latent TB test results, etc. The rec-
ommended treatment in these patients is anti-tubercular
therapy for two months and a subsequent re-evaluation.
Treatment completion is recommended in those patients
who show clinical-analytical improvement.

Nevertheless, specific treatment for CD should commence
(systemic or low bioavailability corticosteroids) followed by
re-evaluation after two months in certain cases. For exam-
ple, immunocompetent patients with no prior history of TB
and a normal thoracic radiography and a negative latent
TB test but clinical and endoscopic findings consistent with

CD. Finally, in patients with a dubious diagnosis who do not
respond favorably to initial treatment, laparoscopy should
be considered, with a subsequent biopsy (15).

Recently a new algorithm has been proposed by V. Pratap
Mouli et al. for cases of a differential diagnosis between
intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease. This group pro-
posed to initiate tuberculosis treatment in doubtful cases
and re-evaluate the clinical response after two, three and six
months of treatment. In patients with no clinical improve-
ment or who deteriorate, a new colonoscopy and biopsy
should be performed to discard other possibilities such as
CD. In this study, 37% of CD patients improved clinically
after six months of anti-tubercular treatment. This may have
been due to the fact that both diseases are granulomatous
and Crohn’s disease often shows spontaneous remission in
up to 20% of cases (50).

However, this study showed a very low correlation between
the clinical response and endoscopic treatment. One hun-
dred per cent of intestinal TB patients showed mucosal
healing after anti-tubercular treatment, whereas only 5%
of Crohn’s disease patients showed mucosal healing, 87%
had no change and 8% deteriorated. Due to all of the above
reasons, endoscopy is recommended independently of
the clinical response to treatment in order to differentiate
between both diseases. Finally, surgical procedures are
reserved for intestinal tuberculosis patients with compli-
cations such as abscesses, fistulas, intestinal obstruction
or perforation.

CONCLUSIONS

Differential diagnosis between intestinal tuberculosis and
Crohn’s disease is particularly difficult and often presents
a  real  challenge,  particularly  when  treating  immigrant
patients from areas where TB is endemic or immunocom-
promised patients. An incorrect diagnosis may prolong the
disease and favor complications such as intestinal perfora-
tion or disseminated TB. Maintaining caution with regard
to a diagnosis based on physical exploration combined
with radiological, endoscopic and histological findings is
of utmost importance. This ensures a definitive diagnosis
and the initiation of a specific treatment as soon as possi-
ble. It is important not to start treatment based exclusively
on endoscopic findings, particularly in high-risk patients.
In doubtful cases, initiating anti-tubercular treatment for
2-6 months with a re-evaluation of the clinical response
may be effective. It is particularly important to evaluate the
endoscopic results, since it has been shown that the great
majority of ITB patients present endoscopic cure following
treatment, unlike CD patients.

REFERENCES

1.  Kirsch R, Pentecost M, Hall PM, et al. Role of colonoscopic biopsy in distin-
guishing between Crohn’s disease and intestinal tuberculosis. J Clin Pathol
2006,59:840-4. DOI: 10.1136/jcp.2005.032383

2.  Di Lauro S, Crum-Cianflone N. Ileitis: when it is not Crohn’s disease. Curr
Gastroenterol Rep 2010;12(4):249-58. DOI: 10.1007/s11894-010-0112-5

3.  Gomollón F, Dignass A, Annese V, et al. 3rd European Evidence-Based Con-
sensus on the Diagnosis and Management of Crohn’s Disease 2016: Part

E. Merino-Gallego et al.REV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657 DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017655

1: Diagnosis and Medical Management. J Crohn’s Colitis 2017;3-25. DOI:
10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjw168

4.  Donoghue  HD,  Holton  J.  Intestinal  tuberculosis.  Curr  Opin  Infect  Dis

2009;22:490-6. DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e3283306712

5.  Ma JY, Tong JL, Ran ZH, et al. Intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disea-
se:  challenging  differential  diagnosis.  J  Dig  Dis  2016;17:155-61.  DOI:
10.1111/1751-2980.12324

6.  Rodríguez Valín E, Villarrubia Enseñat S, Martínez Sánchez E, et al. Centro
Nacional de Epidemiología. Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Informe epidemio-
lógico sobre la situación de la tuberculosis en España. Año 2014. Madrid,
2015.  Consultado  10  mar  2018.  Disponible  en:  www.isciii.es/ISCIII/es/
contenidos/fd-servicios-cientifico-tecnicos/fd-vigilancias-alertas/fd-en-
fermedades/pdf_2015/TB_Informe_2014.pdf

7.  Organización Mundial de la Salud (OMS). Consultado 10 ene 2018. Dispo-

nible en: http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.1315?lang=en.

8.  Abdulrahman Almadi M, Ghosh S, Mohamed Aljebreen A. Differentiating
intestinal tuberculosis from Crohn’s disease: a diagnostic challenge. Am J
Gastroenterol 2010;104:1003-12. DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2008.162

9.  Marehbian J, Arrighi HM, Hass S, et al. Adverse events associated with
common therapy regimens for moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease. Am J
Gastroenterol 2009;104:2524-33. DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2009.322

10.  Horsburgh CR, Rubin EJ. Clinical practice. Latent tuberculosis infection in
the United States. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1441-8. DOI: 10.1056/NEJM-
cp1005750

11.  Riestra S, De Francisco R, Arias-Guillén M, et al. Risks factors for tuber-
culosis  in  inflammatory  bowel  disease:  anti-tumor  necrosis  factor  and
hospitalization.  Rev  Esp  Enferm  Dig  2016;108(9):541-9.  DOI:  10.17235/
reed.2016.4440/2016

12.  Carpio D, Jáuregui-Amezaga A, De Francisco R, et al; GETECCU. Tubercu-
losis  in  anti-tumour  necrosis  factor-treated  inflammatory  bowel  disease
patients  after  the  implementation  of  preventive  measures:  complian-
ce  with  recommendations  and  safety  of  retreatment.  J  Crohns  Colitis
2016;10(10):1186-93. DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjw022

13.  Abreu C, Magro F, Santos-Antunes J, et al. Tuberculosis in anti-TNF-trea-
ted patients remains a problem in countries with an intermediate inciden-
ce: analysis of 25 patients matched with a control population. J Crohns
Colitis 2013;7:e486-92. DOI: 10.1016/j.crohns.2013.03.004

14.  Riestra S, Taxonera C, Carpio D, et al. Recomendaciones del Grupo Español
de Trabajo en Enfermedad de Crohn y Colitis Ulcerosa (GETECCU) sobre el
cribado y tratamiento de la tuberculosis latente en pacientes con enfer-
medad inflamatoria intestinal. Enferm Inflam Intest Dia 2015;14(3):109-19.
DOI: 10.1016/j.eii.2015.09.001

15.  Patel N, Amarapurkar D, Agal S, et al. Gastrointestinal luminal tuberculo-
sis: establishing the diagnosis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2004;19:1240-6.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03485.x

16.  Epstein D, Watermeyer G, Kirsch R. Review article: the diagnosis and ma-
nagement of Crohn’s disease in populations with high-risk rates for tuber-
culosis.  Aliment  Pharmacol  Ther  2007;25:1373-88.  DOI:  10.1111/j.1365-
2036.2007.03332.x

17.  Amarapurkar  DN,  Patel  ND,  Rane  PS.  Diagnosis  of  Crohn’s  disease  in
India  where  tuberculosis  is  widely  prevalent.  World  J  Gastroenterol
2008;14:741-6. DOI: 10.3748/wjg.14.741

18.

Lee MJ, Cresswell FV, John L, et al. Diagnosis and treatment strategies
of tuberculous intestinal perforations: a case series. Eur J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2012;24:594-9. DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e328350fd4a

19.  Jung Y, Hwangbo Y, Manyoon S, et al. Predictive factors for differentiating
between Crohn’s disease and intestinal tuberculosis in Koreans. Am J Gas-
troenterol 2016;111:1156-64. DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2016.212

21.  Mukhopadhyay A, Dey R, Bhattacharya U. Abdominal tuberculosis with an
acute abdomen: our clinical experience. J Clin Diagn Res 2014;8:NC07-9.
DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2014/8654.4574

22.  Dasgupta A, Singh N, Bhatia A. Abdominal tuberculosis: a histopatholo-
gical  study  with  special  reference  to  intestinal  perforation  and  mesen-
teric  vasculopathy.  J  Lab  Physicians  2009;1:56-61.  DOI:  10.4103/0974-
2727.59700

23.  Kim SH, Kim JW, Jeong JB, et al. Differential diagnosis of Crohn’s disease
and intestinal tuberculosis in patients with spontaneous small-bowel per-
foration. Dig Surg 2014;31:151-6. DOI: 10.1159/000363066

24.  Zabana  Y,  Domènech  E,  San  Román  AL,  et  al.  Tuberculous  chemopro-
phylaxis requirements and safety in inflammatory bowel disease patients
prior  to  anti-TNF  therapy.  Inflamm  Bowel  Dis  2008;14:1387-91.  DOI:
10.1002/ibd.20496

25.  Taxonera  C,  Ponferrada  A,  Gisbert  JP,  et  al.  Performance  of  tuberculin
skin test in routine screening for latent tuberculosis infection in patients
with  inflammatory  bowel  diseases.  J  Crohns  Colitis  2015;9:197-8.  DOI:
10.1093/ecco-jcc/jju027.361

26.  Pai M, Zwerling A, Menzies D. Systematic review: T-cell based assays for
the diagnosis of latent tuberculosis infection: an update. Ann Intern Med
2008;149:177-84. DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-149-3-200808050-00241

27.

28.

Li Y, Zhang LF, Liu XQ, et al. The role of in vitro interferonγ-release assay
in differentiating intestinal tuberculosis from Crohn’s disease in China. J
Crohns Colitis 2012;6:317-23. DOI: 10.1016/j.crohns.2011.09.002

Lei Y, Yi FM, Zhao J, et al. Utility of in vitro interferon-γ release assay in
differential diagnosis between intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease.
J Dig Dis 2013;14:68-75. DOI: 10.1111/1751-2980.12017

29.  Papay P, Eser A, Winkler S, et al. Factors impacting the results of interfe-
ron-gamma release assay and tuberculin skin test in routine screening for
latent tuberculosis in patients with inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 2011;17:84-90. DOI: 10.1002/ibd.21427

30.  Wong SH, Ip M, Tang W, et al. Performance of interferon-gamma release
assay for tuberculosis screening in inflammatory bowel disease patients. In-
flamm Bowel Dis 2014;20:2067-72. DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000147

31.  Zumla A, Raviglione M, Hafner R, et al. Current concepts: tuberculosis. N
Engl J Med 2013;368:745-55.7e20. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra1200894

32.  Arias-Guillén M, Riestra S, De Francisco R, et al. T-cell profiling and the
immunodiagnosis  of  latent  tuberculosis  infection  in  patients  with  in-
flammatory  bowel  disease.  Inflamm  Bowel  Dis  2014;20:329-38.  DOI:
10.1097/01.MIB.0000438429.38423.62

33.  Ye BD, Yang SK, Kim D, et al. Diagnostic sensitivity of culture and drug
resistance patterns in Korean patients with intestinal tuberculosis. Int J
Tuberc Lung Dis 2012;16:799-804. DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.11.0252

34.  Ramadass B, Chittaranjan S, Subramanian V, et al. Fecal polymerase chain
reaction for Mycobacterium tuberculosis IS6110 to distinguish Crohn’s di-
sease from intestinal tuberculosis. Indian J Gastroenterol 2010;29:152-6.
DOI: 10.1007/s12664-010-0022-3

35.  Gan  HT,  Chen  YQ,  Ouyang  Q,  et  al.  Differentiation  between  intestinal
tuberculosis  and  Crohn’s  disease  in  endoscopic  biopsy  specimens  by
polymerase  chain  reaction.  Am  J  Gastroenterol  2002;97:1446-51.  DOI:
10.1111/j.1572-0241.2002.05686.x

36.  Jin T, Fei B, Zhang Y, et al. The diagnostic value of polymerase chain reac-
tion for Mycobacterium tuberculosis to distinguish intestinal tuberculosis
from Crohn’s disease: a meta-analysis. Saudi J Gastroenterol 2017;23:3-
10. DOI: 10.4103/1319-3767.199135

37.  Ng  SC,  Hirai  HW,  Tsoi  KK,  et  al.  Systematic  review  with  meta-analysis:
accuracy  of  interferon-gamma  releasing  assay  and  anti-Saccharomyces
cerevisiae  antibody  in  differentiating  intestinal  tuberculosis  from  Cro-
hn’s  disease  in  Asians.  J  Gastroenterol  Hepatol  2014;29:1664-70.  DOI:
10.1111/jgh.12645

20.

Franco-Paredes C, Díaz-Borjón  A, Senger MA,  et  al. The  ever-expanding
association between rheumatologic diseases and tuberculosis. Am J Med
2006;119:470-7. DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2005.10.063

38.  Makharia GK, Sachdev V, Gupta R, et al. Anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae
antibody  does  not  differentiate  between  Crohn’s  disease  and  intestinal
tuberculosis. Dig Dis Sci 2007;52:33-9. DOI: 10.1007/s10620-006-9527-0

Intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease: the importance and difficulty of a differential diagnosisREV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657 DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017656

39.  Kim  YS,  Kim  YH,  Kim  WH,  et  al.  Diagnostic  utility  of  anti-Saccharomy-
ces cerevisiae antibody (ASCA) and interferon-γ assay in the differential
diagnosis of Crohn’s disease and intestinal tuberculosis. Clin Chim Acta
2011;412:1527-32. DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.04.029

40.  Caprilli R, Frieri G. The dyspeptic macrophage 30 years later: an update
in the pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease. Dig Liver Dis 2009;41:166-8. DOI:
10.1016/j.dld.2008.09.012

41.  Makharia GK, Srivastava S, Das P, et al. Clinical, endoscopic, and histolo-
gical differentiations between Crohn’s disease and intestinal tuberculosis.
Am J Gastroenterol 2010;105:642-51. DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2009.585

42.  Uzunkoy  A,  Harma  M.  Diagnosis  of  abdominal  tuberculosis:  experien-
ce  from  11  cases  and  review  of  the  literature.  World  J  Gastroenterol
2004;10:3647-9. DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v10.i24.3647

43.  Du  J,  Ma  YY,  Xiang  H,  et  al.  Confluent  granulomas  and  ulcers  lined  by
epithelioid  histiocytes:  new  ideal  method  for  differentiation  of  ITB  and
CD?  A  meta-analysis.  PLoS  One  2014;9:e103303.  DOI:  10.1371/journal.
pone.0103303

45.  Yu H, Liu Y, Wang Y, et al. Clinical, endoscopic and histological differen-
tiations  between  Crohn’s  disease  and  intestinal  tuberculosis.  Digestion
2012;85:202-9. DOI: 10.1159/000335431

46.  Zhao XS, Wang ZT, Wu ZY, et al. Differentiation of Crohn’s disease from
intestinal tuberculosis by clinical and CT enterographic models. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 2014;20:916-25. DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000025

47.  Park  YH,  Chung  WS,  Lim  JS,  et  al.  Diagnostic  role  of  computed  tomo-
graphic  enterography  differentiating  Crohn’s  disease  from  intestinal
tuberculosis. J Comput Assist Tomogr 2013;37:834-9. DOI: 10.1097/RCT.
0b013e31829e0292

48.  Ho Bae J, Hyoung Park S, Duk Ye B, et al. Development and validation of
a novel prediction model for differential diagnosis between Crohn’s disea-
se and intestinal tuberculosis. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2017;23:1614-23. DOI:
10.1097/MIB.0000000000001162

49.  Critchley JA, Young F, Orton L, et al. Corticosteroids for prevention of mor-
tality in people with tuberculosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Infect Dis 2013;13:223-37. DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70321-3

44.  Banerjee R, Balaji M, Sasikala M, et al. Granulomas of intestinal tubercu-
losis and Crohn’s disease can be differentiated by CD73 cell surface mar-
ker expression: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 2013;58:2301-7. DOI: 10.1007/
s10620-013-2667-0

50.  Pratap Mouli V, Munot K, Ananthankirshnan A, et al. Endoscopic and clini-
cal responses to anti-tubercular therapy can differentiate intestinal tuber-
culosis from Crohn’s disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017;45:27-37. DOI:
10.1111/apt.13840

E. Merino-Gallego et al.REV ESP ENFERM DIG 2018:110(10):650-657 DOI: 10.17235/reed.2018.5184/2017