Review
Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Comprehensive Analysis of
Molecular Bases, Predictive Biomarkers, Diagnostic Methods,
and Therapeutic Options

Eguzkiñe Diez-Martin 1,2
Egoitz Astigarraga 1

, Leidi Hernandez-Suarez 1,2

, Carmen Muñoz-Villafranca 3, Leire Martin-Souto 2


, Andoni Ramirez-Garcia 2

and Gabriel Barreda-Gómez 1,*

1 Research and Development Department, IMG Pharma Biotech S.L., 48170 Zamudio, Spain;

eguz@imgpharma.com (E.D.-M.); leidi@imgpharma.com (L.H.-S.)

2 Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of

the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48940 Leioa, Spain; leire.martin@ehu.eus (L.M.-S.);
andoni.ramirez@ehu.eus (A.R.-G.)

3 Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Basurto, Avda Montevideo 18, 48013 Bilbao, Spain;

mariadelcarmen.munozvillafranca@osakidetza.eus

* Correspondence: gabriel.barreda@imgpharma.com; Tel.: +34-94-4236-577; Fax: +34-94-6013-455

Abstract: In inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), such as Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis
(UC), the immune system relentlessly attacks intestinal cells, causing recurrent tissue damage over
the lifetime of patients. The etiology of IBD is complex and multifactorial, involving environmen-
tal, microbiota, genetic, and immunological factors that alter the molecular basis of the organism.
Among these, the microbiota and immune cells play pivotal roles; the microbiota generates antigens
recognized by immune cells and antibodies, while autoantibodies target and attack the intestinal
membrane, exacerbating inflammation and tissue damage. Given the altered molecular framework,
the analysis of multiple molecular biomarkers in patients proves exceedingly valuable for diagnosing
and prognosing IBD, including markers like C reactive protein and fecal calprotectin. Upon detection
and classification of patients, specific treatments are administered, ranging from conventional drugs
to new biological therapies, such as antibodies to neutralize inflammatory molecules like tumor necro-
sis factor (TNF) and integrin. This review delves into the molecular basis and targets, biomarkers,
treatment options, monitoring techniques, and, ultimately, current challenges in IBD management.

Citation: Diez-Martin, E.; Hernandez-

Suarez, L.; Muñoz-Villafranca, C.;

Martin-Souto, L.; Astigarraga, E.;

Ramirez-Garcia, A.; Barreda-Gómez,

G. Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A

Comprehensive Analysis of Molecular

Bases, Predictive Biomarkers,

Diagnostic Methods, and Therapeutic

Options. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062.

Keywords: inflammatory bowel disease; molecular mechanisms; biomarkers; therapeutic targets;
Crohn’s disease; ulcerative colitis; genetic; immunity; microbiota; environmental; antibodies

https://doi.org/10.3390/

ijms25137062

Academic Editors: Alip Borthakur

and Takuji Tanaka

Received: 2 May 2024

Revised: 15 June 2024

Accepted: 25 June 2024

Published: 27 June 2024

Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

1. Inflammatory Bowel Disease

The autoimmune disorders characterized by non-infectious chronic inflammation
that mainly affects the lining of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract are classified into the group
of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) [1–3]. This condition, notorious for its chronic,
progressive, and relapsing nature, significantly impacts the quality of life of the patients
through their immune dysregulation and the resulting inflammatory dysfunction [4,5].

The predominant IBD disorders are Crohn’s disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), inde-
terminate colitis (IC), and unclassified colitis (IBD-U) (other non-infectious inflammations
of the bowel), all of them presenting certain clinical and histopathological similarities but
affecting different regions of the GI tract. UC primarily targets the mucosa of the colon in a
continuous pattern, whereas CD can affect any part of the GI tract, from mouth to anus, in a
discontinuous pattern [1,6,7]. Within both CD and UC, various subtypes exist. UC subtypes
are based on the affected area, such as proctitis (limited to the rectum), proctosigmoiditis
(extending into the sigmoid), distal ulcerative colitis (beyond the sigmoid), or pancolitis
(involving the entire colon up to the cecum). Conversely, CD is classified according to

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25137062

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

 International Journal of Molecular SciencesInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

2 of 37

phenotype, including inflammatory, structuring, or penetrating presentations [1]. Since
2005, the Montreal classification of IBD has been utilized as a standard framework for
categorizing the disease according to its clinical, molecular, and serological features [8–10].
No cure exists for IBD, necessitating symptomatic treatment strategies that primarily
aim to reduce inflammation and promote gut healing [11–13]. However, the administration
of these medications often entails side effects and may lead to clinical failure or loss of
response, emphasizing the necessity of diligent monitoring and the exploration of more
efficient treatment modalities [12,14–18].

The clinical presentation is wide, as patients can experience diarrhea, abdominal
pain, rectal bleeding, and weight loss [11,19]. Beyond its primary impact on the GI tract,
IBD may present extraintestinal manifestations (EIMs) in approximately 25% to 40% of
patients; as such, this disease is classified as a systemic disease. The EIM can vary widely
among patients and often includes fatigue, IBD-related arthritis, anemia, oral aphthous
ulcers, pyoderma gangrenosum, fever, nephrolithiasis, osteoporosis, anterior uveitis, and
erythema nodosum, among others [4,6,11,19,20]. The wide range of clinical presenta-
tions associated with IBD diseases delays diagnosis and renders diagnosis challenging;
hence, understanding them is necessary for identifying novel and valuable biomarkers and
therapeutic options [21,22].

The incidence and prevalence of IBD have seen a notable increase over the last decades
since its emergence in the 20th century (Figure 1), specifically in industrialized nations,
such as North American and European countries. Indeed, the highest prevalence is ob-
served among Caucasians. Nevertheless, the global burden of IBD has increased due to
its growth in newly industrialized countries, like those in Asia, Africa, and Latin America,
and in immigrant populations that move to industrialized countries [3,11,19,23,24]. Based
on the 2019 Global Burden of Disease (GBD) findings [25], the prevalence of IBD was
estimated to affect approximately 5 million individuals, with an annual incidence of ap-
proximately 400,000 new cases reported. Furthermore, age and sex influence the incidence
and prevalence of IBD. For example, disease onset occurs during childhood in 25% of
cases, with its incidence continuing to rise [12,23,26,27]. In Europe, the EpiCom/Epi-IBD
study reported an incidence of 15 cases/100,000 person-years [28]. Although the incidence
seems to be stabilizing in the Western world, the prevalence of IBD continues to rise. This
trend is expected, as IBD typically starts at a young age, has low mortality, and cur-rently
lacks a curative treatment [29]. Therefore, the increasing prevalence of IBD highlights the
need for a better understanding of its molecular bases to develop targeted therapies and
diagnostic tools.

Figure 1. Prevalence (left) and incidence (right) trends from 1990 to 2019. Charts acquired from
Global Burden of Disease (GDB).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062 3 of 39   the gut microbiota have been proposed as prominent environmental triggers for IBD, potentially contributing to chronic inﬂammation [17,30,35]. The adaptive immune response of patients is also implicated in IBD, as it involves an ampliﬁed response of immune cells leading to the secretion of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, which in turn triggers inﬂammation. Along with the adaptative immune response, the intestinal barrier and antigen-presenting cells (APCs) also play an important role in the development of this disease [6]. Indeed, it is important to note that a notable proportion of the genes associated with IBD are related to immune function, including, speciﬁcally, the host mucosal barrier function and its interaction with the microbiota. To sum up, genetic factors trigger immunological dysregulation, which, in conjunction with microbial and environmental inﬂuences, leads to the development of IBD [30,33,36–38].  Figure 1. Prevalence (left) and incidence (right) trends from 1990 to 2019. Charts acquired from Global Burden of Disease (GDB). In light of the preceding considerations, this review intends to oﬀer a comprehensive analysis of the molecular bases, biomarkers, diagnostic methods, and therapeutic options of IBD, which may assist other researchers in understanding the disease’s background. We will conclude by outlining the remaining challenges and unmet clinical needs in this complex group of diseases. 2. Underpinnings of IBD: From Molecular to Environmental Factors The intestine is a physical and biochemical barrier comprising certain crucial components: intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) tightly bound to each other, surface mucus secreted by globet cells, normal peristalsis, the microbiota, immune cells, and numerous protective factors. Moreover, in the gut mucosa, immune cells can be found in organized secondary lymphoid structures, known as gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), in intestinal-tissue-draining mesenteric lymph nodes, between surface epithelial cells, and within the underlying connective tissue. In healthy individuals, these components collaborate to uphold the integrity of the barrier, preventing its disruption and the onset of diseases, such as IBD [39–43]. The aforementioned aspects of the intestinal barrier play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of IBD as they signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the susceptibility to local and systemic inﬂammation. Disruption of this barrier by environmental factors in genetically predisposed individuals may allow the translocation of commensal bacteria into the intestinal lamina propria, potentially triggering immune responses and perpetuating the inﬂammatory cascade [40,44]. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

3 of 37

Moreover, this variation in incidence and prevalence across different populations
suggests the involvement of both genetic and environmental factors, which can be defined
as crucial areas for research into molecular targets. Indeed, although IBD etiology remains
unclear due to its intricate and multifactorial nature, it is known that there is a combination
of genetic and environmental factors. These factors lead to an uncontrolled activation of
the intestinal immune system against commensal microbiota and other targets [30–34].
Regarding the genetic factors, they appear to be pivotal to the onset of IBD. Approximately
more than 200 loci have been related to IBD susceptibility through genome-wide association
studies (GWASs), which will be discussed later, but there is ongoing research aimed at
uncovering additional genetic markers [6,30,31]. Concerning environmental factors, the
observed rise in IBD prevalence, particularly in industrialized countries, suggests the
important role of environmental influences in its development. Among these, smoking,
alcohol, drugs, and diet are the most significant. The hypothesis suggests that all of
these factors modify the GI lining and disrupt the gut microbiota, a complex ecosystem
of microorganisms colonizing the GI tract. Certainly, disruptions of the gut microbiota
have been proposed as prominent environmental triggers for IBD, potentially contributing
to chronic inflammation [17,30,35]. The adaptive immune response of patients is also
implicated in IBD, as it involves an amplified response of immune cells leading to the
secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which in turn triggers inflammation. Along with
the adaptative immune response, the intestinal barrier and antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
also play an important role in the development of this disease [6]. Indeed, it is important
to note that a notable proportion of the genes associated with IBD are related to immune
function, including, specifically, the host mucosal barrier function and its interaction with
the microbiota. To sum up, genetic factors trigger immunological dysregulation, which,
in conjunction with microbial and environmental influences, leads to the development of
IBD [30,33,36–38].

In light of the preceding considerations, this review intends to offer a comprehensive
analysis of the molecular bases, biomarkers, diagnostic methods, and therapeutic options
of IBD, which may assist other researchers in understanding the disease’s background.
We will conclude by outlining the remaining challenges and unmet clinical needs in this
complex group of diseases.

2. Underpinnings of IBD: From Molecular to Environmental Factors

The intestine is a physical and biochemical barrier comprising certain crucial compo-
nents: intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) tightly bound to each other, surface mucus secreted
by globet cells, normal peristalsis, the microbiota, immune cells, and numerous protective
factors. Moreover, in the gut mucosa, immune cells can be found in organized secondary
lymphoid structures, known as gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), in intestinal-tissue-
draining mesenteric lymph nodes, between surface epithelial cells, and within the under-
lying connective tissue. In healthy individuals, these components collaborate to uphold
the integrity of the barrier, preventing its disruption and the onset of diseases, such as
IBD [39–43].

The aforementioned aspects of the intestinal barrier play a pivotal role in the patho-
genesis of IBD as they significantly influence the susceptibility to local and systemic in-
flammation. Disruption of this barrier by environmental factors in genetically predisposed
individuals may allow the translocation of commensal bacteria into the intestinal lam-
ina propria, potentially triggering immune responses and perpetuating the inflammatory
cascade [40,44].

Hence, it is crucial to comprehend the dysregulated molecular mechanism within the
intestine environment that contributes to the development of IBD. Similarly to the factors
influencing its etiology, research must delve into genetic, immunological, environmental,
and microbiota influences (Figure 2).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

4 of 37

Figure 2. Most relevant immunological, genetic, environmental, and microbiota influences.

2.1. Genetic Determinants

The most popular technique to provide evidence of causality using genetic proxies
for putative risk factors in instrumental variable analyses, GWAS, has defined more than
240 allelic risk variants linked to IBD in genes encoding proteins involved in both innate
and acquired immune responses [40,45,46]. Research studies have indicated a heritable
risk, which is more pronounced for CD compared to UC [47]. Indeed, the influence of
genetic factors in IBD explains the higher risk among first-degree relatives of patients with
IBD and the greater concordance in homozygous twins. However, most cases of IBD have
a multigenic origin [47].

The first and most well-established gene with the greatest impact on IBD is caspase
activating recruitment domain 15 (CARD15), also known as NOD2 (nucleotide-binding
oligomerization domain-containing protein 2), which was discovered by Ogura et al. [48]
within the IBD1 loci on chromosome 16q12 [38,40,49]. Nowadays, it is defined as a gene that
encodes a protein in leukocytes whose function is immunological, as it is a pattern recogni-
tion receptor (PRR), within the group called NOD-like receptors, which recognize molecular
patterns present in microorganisms and trigger the innate immune response. Subsequently,
it activates the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) protein, regulating the expression of tumor
necrosis factor (TNF), chemokines, antimicrobial peptides, and other pro-inflammatory
cytokines [50–55]. Hence, this gene maintains intestinal barrier integrity by regulating the
composition of the intestinal microbiota and modulating both innate and adaptative im-
mune responses [50]. Variants of the NOD2 gene result in unresponsiveness to pathogens,
allowing them to penetrate the gut and triggering the inflammatory response. Indeed, this
gene has been linked to ileal CD (with a three-fold increased risk), earlier age at diagnosis,
a higher incidence of the disease, and the need for surgery [56]. This gene has also been
related to sacrolitis and uveitis EIM of IBD [4].

Additionally, the IBD3 locus situated on chromosome 6p21 has been identified as
a susceptibility locus for IBD. This locus encompasses genes encoding the major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC), including human leucocyte antigen (HLA) and class I,
II, and III genes. In the latter class, non-classical proteins from the MHC, such as TNF

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062 4 of 39   Hence, it is crucial to comprehend the dysregulated molecular mechanism within the intestine environment that contributes to the development of IBD. Similarly to the factors inﬂuencing its etiology, research must delve into genetic, immunological, environmental, and microbiota inﬂuences (Figure 2).  Figure 2. Most relevant immunological, genetic, environmental, and microbiota inﬂuences. 2.1. Genetic Determinants The most popular technique to provide evidence of causality using genetic proxies for putative risk factors in instrumental variable analyses, GWAS, has deﬁned more than 240 allelic risk variants linked to IBD in genes encoding proteins involved in both innate and acquired immune responses [40,45,46]. Research studies have indicated a heritable risk, which is more pronounced for CD compared to UC [47]. Indeed, the inﬂuence of genetic factors in IBD explains the higher risk among ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with IBD and the greater concordance in homozygous twins. However, most cases of IBD have a multigenic origin [47]. The ﬁrst and most well-established gene with the greatest impact on IBD is caspase activating recruitment domain 15 (CARD15), also known as NOD2 (nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2), which was discovered by Ogura et al. [48] within the IBD1 loci on chromosome 16q12 [38,40,49]. Nowadays, it is deﬁned as a gene that encodes a protein in leukocytes whose function is immunological, as it is a pattern recognition receptor (PRR), within the group called NOD-like receptors, which recognize molecular patterns present in microorganisms and trigger the innate immune response. Subsequently, it activates the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) protein, regulating the expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF), chemokines, antimicrobial peptides, and other pro-inﬂammatory cytokines [50–55]. Hence, this gene maintains intestinal barrier integrity by regulating the composition of the intestinal microbiota and modulating both innate and adaptative immune responses [50]. Variants of the NOD2 gene result in unresponsiveness to pathogens, allowing them to penetrate the gut and triggering the inﬂammatory response. Indeed, this gene has been linked to ileal CD (with a three-fold increased risk), Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

5 of 37

and other immune-related proteins, are encoded, but these are not HLA genes them-
selves [37,49,57]. Regarding TNF, it seems to be the principal pro-inflammatory cytokine
involved in IBD development, as it promotes inflammation by inducing the production
of other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and IL-6. TNF stimulates the uptake
of epithelial antigens in the ileum. Several polymorphisms have been found in this gene,
which is related to IBD, such as the TNF-α-238G/A [58], 308 G/A [58–61], -857 C/T [60,62],
or 1031T/C [58,63], as well as TNF superfamily member 15 (TNF15) [64,65]. Additionally,
TNF has been proposed to contribute to the onset of EIMs [66–68].

One of the functions of HLA genes is their role in the differentiation of self- and
non-dangerous tolerable antigens from those that are extraneous, against whom a response
must be initiated. The involvement of HLA variations in IBD is hypothesized to stem
from an aberrant function of these genes, leading to an immune response against key
bacteria of the gut microbiota and self-antigens owing to cross-reactivity. HLA genes play
a more modulatory role rather than direct susceptibility to the disease, and they are more
relevant in UC than in CD [56]. Certain variants of specific alleles (e.g., rs2647087 [69],
rs2395185 [12], and rs2097432 [12]) have been associated with the development of im-
munogenicity against anti-TNF treatments, the requirement for surgery, or the severity
of the disease [12,49,70]. Furthermore, specifically, HLA-DRB1 is identified as one of the
primary genes associated with UC, along with HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes show-
ing robust associations [38,61,70]. In contrast, for CD, polymorphisms in the HLA-G and
HLAB21/Cw8 genes are more strongly associated than those observed in UC, although
both UC and CD have shared risk loci and gene variants [37,38,71]. In addition, HLA genes
were associated with EIMs in several studies, as well as with the anti-TNF therapy loss of
response owing to antidrug antibody development [4,72]. For instance, Musculoskeletal
EIMs in CD are linked to HLA-A2, HLA-DR1, and HLADQw5, whereas DRB1*0103, B27,
and B58 alleles with UC [4].

Following the IBD-associated loci, the locus IBD 1 to 27 were described, although it is
not a usual classification as it is preferred to define the gene and not the loci [73,74]. For
example, within the IBD5 locus (5q31), genes, such as interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1)
and solute carrier family 22 member 4 (SLC22A4, also known as Carnitine/organic cation
transporter 1 (OCTN1)) and 5 (SLC22A5, also known as OCTN2), have been identified, all
of which are related to these disorders [75–77].

Additional genes associated with IBD development and the immune response, pathogen
detection, or intestinal barrier integrity include IL10 [38,78,79], IL-10 receptor (IL10R) [38,79,80],
IL-23 receptor (IL23R) [38,40], IL-1 receptor alpha (IL1RA) [80], autophagy-related 16-like 1
protein (ATG16L1) [38,81], immunity-related guanosine triphosphate M (IRGM) [38,81],
Protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 2 (PTPN2) [38,80], cadherin 1 (CDH1) [38],
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4-α) [38,40], and unc51-like autophagy kinase 1
(ULK1) [43], among others. It should be noted that the IL23R gene, located on chromosome
1, presents some variants (e.g., Arg381Gin) associated with a decreased risk of IBD as those
alter receptor expression and function. Hence, IL-23 pro-inflammatory signals are not
effectively transduced, leading to a decreased inflammatory response, disruption of a wide
variety of signaling pathways, and a failure of cell functions [56,82].

Regarding IBD EIM-associated genes, IL-8 receptor alpha (IL8RA), positive regula-
tory domain I (PRDM1), ubiquitin-specific protease 15 (USP15), and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase 3 (TIMP3) genes are related to pyoderma gangrenosum, integrin sub-
unit beta 3 (ITGB3), suppressor of cytokine signaling 5 (SOCS5), C-type lectin domain
family 4 member K (CLEC4K or CD207), integrin alpha L chain (ITGAL), Prostaglandin E
receptor 4 (PTGER4) with erythema nodosum, primary sclerosing cholangitis with tyrosine
kinase 2 (TYK2), signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3), Janus kinase 2
(JAK2), SOCS1, Forkhead box protein O1 (FOXO1), interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8),
Bcl-2-like protein 11 (BCL2L11), and ubiquitin associated and SH3 domain containing A
(UBASH3A) [4].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

6 of 37

However, depending on the ethnicity, the significance of the allele presence in the
patient could vary for all of the mentioned variants [40,65,81]. For example, NOD2 variants
are present in European patients but not in Asiatic patients [40,81]. Furthermore, depending
on the gene variant, it could be a risk or a protective factor against IBD development, and
it can also determine the severity of the disorder [38,40]. Thus, gene associations differ
not only between CD and UC but also among different disease presentations, such as
the HLA-DQA1*05 allele, which has been associated with the development of antidrug
antibodies [72], and different ethnicities. On the other hand, it should be noted that
depending on the affected allele, the function will be different.

In addition to immune-related genes, certain genes encoding mitochondrial proteins
have also been identified as IBD susceptibility genes. Indeed, mitochondria are increas-
ingly recognized as integral to immune response signaling. Experimental studies have
revealed a downregulation in mitochondrial genes and a correlation between the tight
junctions of the IECs and mitochondrial dysfunction [83–85]. Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
medium chain (ACADM) [83], pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isozyme 1 (PDK1) [83], and
fission 1 (FIS1) [83] mitochondrial genes are associated with UC, SLC22A5 [85,86], laccase
domain containing 1 (LACC1, also known as C13orf3 and fatty acid metabolism-immunity
nexus (FAMIN)) [85,87], glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) [85], and GPX3 [85,88] with CD,
while aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 family member (ALDH2) [64,85] and STAT3 [85,89] are
associated with IBD in general.

Interestingly, recent studies [84,85,90] have revealed that mitochondrial PARK7 (Parkin-
son’s disease 7) and LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) genes are related to an increased
risk of IBD. While these genes are primarily linked to Parkinson’s disease (PD), they are
also implicated in the regulation of the immune system, mitophagy, and maintaining mito-
chondrial balance, making their dysregulation a risk factor for IBD and other autoimmune
disorders [81,83,91]. Likewise, PARK7 deficiency is thought to elevate p53 levels, a protein
that induces apoptosis in IECs. Consequently, adequate expression of PARK7 not only
provides a defense mechanism against oxidative stress but also protects the mucosal bar-
rier [83,92,93]. Various epidemiological and experimental studies have linked IBD with
neurodegenerative diseases, such as PD. In addition to PARK7 and LRRK2, the genes
NOD2, GAK, HLA-DRB5, and MAPT are present in both IBD and PD [90,94].

A table (Table 1) has been added to simplify the explained information. This table

provides details about the gene loci, their functions, and the associated diseases.

Table 1. Loci, gene, function, and associated disease of each genetic determinant related to IBD.

Gene

Function

Associated Disease

References

Loci

IBD1

IBD3

IBD5

HLA class I
HLA class II

HLA class III

IRF1

SLC22A4
SLC22A5

NOD2/CARD15

Microorganism detection

Autotolerance

Triggers inflammatory response;
stimulates antigen uptake

Transcription factor that stimulates
pro-inflammatory cytokines;

L-carnitine transporter

IBD (CD)


IBD

IBD

[33,38,40,48,50,52–54,76,80,81]

[12,37,38,49,57–71]

[75–77,86]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

7 of 37

Table 1. Cont.

Loci

Gene

Function

Associated Disease

IL-10; IL-10R
IL-23; IL-23R

Anti-inflammatory response
Pro-inflammatory response

IL1RA

ATG16L1
IRGM
PTPN2

CDH1

HNF4-α
ULK1
IL8RA
PRDM1
USP15
TIMP3

ITGB3

SOCS5
CLEC4K/CD207
ITGAL
PTGER4
TYK2

STAT3

JAK2
SOCS1
FOXO1

IRF8

BCL211

UBASH3A

ACADM

PDK1

FIS1

LACC1

GPX1; GPX3

ALDH2
STAT3
PARK7
LRRK2
GAK
MAPT

IL-1 receptor antagonist

Autophagy
Autophagy
Autophagy
E-cadherin of adherent junction
production
Expression of cell junctions
Autophagy
Pro-inflammatory response
Regulation of immune response
Deubiquitination of proteins
Anti-inflammatory response
Component of certain integrin
receptors
Anti-inflammatory response
Innate immune response
Component of integrins
Prostaglandin E2 receptor
Cytokine receptor
Transcription factor of cytokines and
growth factors
Cytokine and growth factor signaling
Suppressor of cytokine signaling
Myogenic growth and differentiation
Regulation of genes involved in
immune response
Apoptotic activator
Modulates T cell activation and
function
Degradation of medium-chain fatty
acids
Regulation of glucose and fatty acid
metabolisms
Mitochondrial fission
Purine nucleoside enzyme regulating
redox balance and preventing
cytoplasmic acidification
Reduce organic peroxide and
hydrogen peroxide
Cellular metabolisms
Transcription factor
Redox sensing
Autophagy, mitophagy, apoptosis
Clathrin-coated vesicle trafficking
Microtubules and axonal transport

IBD
IBD
Pediatric
IBD
IBD


IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD
EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD

EIMs in IBD






IBD
IBD
IBD
IBD
IBD

References

[38,78,79]
[38,40]

[38,80]

[38,81]
[38,81]
[38,80]

[38]

[38,40]
[43]
[4,95]
[4,95]
[4,95]
[4,95]

[4,95]

[4,95]
[4,95]
[4,95]
[4,95]
[4,95]

[4,95]

[4,95]
[4,95]
[4,95]

[4,95]

[4,95]

[4,95]

[83]

[83]

[83]

[85,87]

[85,88]

[64,85]
[85,89]
[83,85]
[85,91,94]
[90,94]
[90,94]

It is interesting to note that IBD-associated genetic variants may have important
evolutionary implications, potentially persisting in the genetic pool due to their dual
impact. While a variant may increase the risk of IBD, it could also confer benefits for
specific immune functions, such as the HLA class II DRB1*04 allele [49], which increases the
risk of present UC but is protective against primary sclerosis cholangitis. In addition, the
onset of this disease is multifactorial, typically requiring the interplay of multiple genetic
variants, environmental factors, and immunological dysregulation [36]. Likewise, novel

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

8 of 37

therapeutic options, particularly the innovation of anti-TNF treatments, enable patients to
live longer and potentially pass on their genes to their offspring [96].

2.2. Immunological Dysregulation

The immune system is responsible for protecting the organism against pathogens
(bacteria, fungi, viruses, or parasites), harmful substances from the environment, and cell
changes that can become cancer cells [40,97]. Because it is a very complex and coordinated
system, for its study and understanding it can be divided into two subsystems: the innate
immune system and the adaptative immune system. On the one hand, the innate immune
system is the first and nonspecific defense, providing the initial response to microorganisms
and other external particles. It is composed of physical barriers (intestinal mucosa, skin,
etc.), physiological barriers (low pH, temperature, or chemical mediators), small molecules
(complement, defensins, etc.), and innate immune cells, which are comprised of myeloid-
derived cells (neutrophils, monocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), and macrophages), and innate
lymphoid cells, including natural killer (NK) cells [40,98,99]. On the other hand, the
adaptive immune system is a specific response against the antigen, and it is composed of T
and B lymphocytes [97,98,100–102]. Likewise, the adaptive immune system is classified into
two groups: humoral immunity, which is mediated by antibodies, mainly immunoglobulin
(Ig) A in the gut, secreted by B cells, and cellular immunity, which is mediated by T
lymphocytes that can be functionally divided into CD4+ helper T cells (Th), CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells (Tc), and regulatory T cells (Treg) [39,97,101]. Th cells can be further subdivided
functionally into various subsets that are, in part, defined by the cytokines they produce.
These include Th1 cells, Th2 cells, Th9 cells, Th17 cells, and T follicular helper cells (Tfh),
among others [103].

Furthermore, the microbiota also plays a crucial role in the induction, training, and
function of the host immune system, protecting from pathogenic microorganisms and
maintaining homeostasis together. Hence, the immune system develops a tolerance to
this microbiota, creating a useful symbiotic relationship [104–106]. In fact, microbiota
could even be considered a biological barrier of the innate immune system complementing
the physical and physiological barriers mentioned above. Disruption of this relationship
triggers an inflammatory response that can lead to various diseases. Indeed, many studies
support the idea that IBD results from a dysregulated response by the mucosal immune
system to the microbiota of the intestinal lumen [40,104].

One of the main theories about the development of IBD in genetically susceptible
individuals is that certain environmental factors can compromise the integrity of the
intestinal barrier and intestinal microbiota, leading to the activation of inflammatory
mechanisms [34,40].

Initially, epithelial disruption increases autophagy and apoptosis, while colonocyte
differentiation is decreased. Consequently, surface mucus production becomes defective,
and tight bounds between IECs start to increase permeability [81,107]. This permeability is
also enhanced by abnormal regulation of genes (e.g., WFDC2 downregulation) and some
specific gene variants (e.g., HNF4A, CDH1, or LAMB1), which also compromise tight
junctions [40,106]. Likewise, pro-inflammatory cytokines released during inflammatory
mechanisms (such as TNF, interferon-gamma (INF-γ), IL-1β, or IL-13) further increase
barrier permeability by affecting tight junctions, IECs, and protein from membranes, while
also inducing apoptosis of IECs, as observed with IFN-γ and IL-13 [40,106]. Moreover,
NOD2 defective variants result in intestinal dysbiosis that reduces butyrate oxidation,
leading to an epithelium deprived of energy and degrading the mucus, which exposes
more of the IECs to luminal agents. Consequently, it heightens their exposure to microbial
signals, further prompting the secretion of inflammatory cytokines [104,108]. Interestingly,
this decreased oxidation also elevates oxygen levels, promoting a more aerobic environment
that favors dysbiosis with aerobic bacteria [104].

Upon gut barrier disruption and immune system dysregulation, microorganisms can
penetrate the epithelial barrier and infiltrate the intestinal lamina propria. Then, DCs

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

9 of 37

are attracted to the inflammatory site by CCL20 and addressins [40]. Certainly, elevated
recruitment and activation of various immune cell subsets are evident in IBD. Specifically, in
the lamina propria of IBD patients, myeloid cells exhibiting an “inflammatory” phenotype,
marked by heightened cytokine production, have been identified [99].

In the lamina propria, DCs and macrophages recognize pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs), such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) and flagellin, through their PRRs,
like toll-like receptors (TLRs) or NOD-like receptors (NLRs), to phagocytize them [106,109].
Subsequently, DCs and macrophages release pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF and
many interleukins (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, IL-18, and IL-23).

Among them, IL-1β and IL-18 are produced by the inflammasome, which is chronically
activated in IBD, exacerbating the inflammation and tissue damage [110]. Moreover, IL-1β
induces the release of IL-17 and IFN-γ in immune cells, such as T cells and innate lymphoid
cells, which also contribute to maintaining inflammation [106,110]. Regarding IL-23, it
activates STAT-4 in memory T cells, which in turn induces the production of IFN-γ, thereby
increasing inflammation [111]. This is why IL23R variants, in which the cytokine receptor is
not properly activated, serve as a protective factor for both CD and UC. Similarly, NK cells
can be activated by cytokines, e.g., IFN-γ or IL-23, releasing inflammatory cytokines and
toxic particles and inducing apoptosis [57,106]. APCs also secrete cytokines that exacerbate
inflammation and stimulate the adaptive immune response [106]. Although in healthy
patients intestinal DCs usually produce anti-inflammatory IL-10 to maintain homeostasis,
in IBD patients, its production is decreased. This reduction is partly due to a decline in
Bifidobacterium and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which promotes its production, but it may also
be a consequence of the presence of an IL-10 gene variant [40,78,106,112].

In IBDs, immune system dysregulation that originates in the innate response sub-
sequently extends to the adaptive response. This latter reaction is directed against self-
antigens, triggering chronic inflammation [40,111]. The adaptive immune response starts
once an antigen is detected by DCs and presented to T helper 0 or naive (Th0) cells in
GALT [106,113]. However, in individuals with IBD-associated risk HLA alleles, a residue
change in the antigen-binding domain may lead to the presentation of incorrect peptides
to T cells. This incorrect presentation can contribute to the activation of auto-reactive
T cells [114]. Subsequently, the immune system is activated against both intestinal and
non-intestinal antigens, with the latter contributing to EIMs [4].

Then, depending on the environmental cytokines and transcription factors, Th0 cells
can differentiate into specific subsets. For example, IL-12 and IL-18 drive differentiation into
Th1 cells, IL-4 promotes differentiation into Th2 cells, TGF-β and IL-6 induce differentiation
into Th17 cells, TGF-β and IL-2 lead to differentiation into Treg cells, TGF-β and IL-4 drive
differentiation into Th9 cells, and IL-21 drives differentiation into Tfh cells [40,106,115].

Specifically, in the case of CD, there is an exacerbated Th1 and Th17 response, with
the latter leading to the activation of Tc cells and the excessive release of IFN-γ and IL-
17 [40,106,116]. On the contrary, in UC, the induced response is mainly mediated by Th2
cells, which is characterized by IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and IL-23 release, with IL-5 and IL-13
being particularly increased, along with the Th17 response, involving the release of IL-
17 and IL-22 [40,106,116]. Similarly, the Th9 response is also related to UC, as they are
responsible for regulating inflammation and anti-tumor response, secreting IL-3, IL-9, IL-10,
and IL-21 [40,113].

Moreover, in healthy individuals, anaerobic commensal bacteria present in the micro-
biota produce short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which activate Treg cells and inhibit Th17
responses. However, in individuals with IBD, there is a reduction in anaerobic bacteria,
leading to decreased SCFA production. Consequently, the anti-inflammatory response, me-
diated by IL-10 cytokine released by Treg cells, is compromised, allowing for the activation
of Th17 cells. Th17 cells then produce pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-17, IL-17A,
IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-22. Furthermore, the reduction in commensal microbiota may disrupt
the microbial balance, allowing the proliferation of pathogenic bacteria. These detrimental

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

10 of 37

bacteria promote the production of serum amyloid A proteins (SAA1 and SAA2), which
are associated with IBD and promote inflammatory Th17 responses [40,106].

The humoral response also participates in the pathogenesis of IBD. When an infection
occurs, some of the Th0 cells undergo differentiation into Tfh cells, which subsequently
participate in the activation of the B cells. These B cells further differentiate into plasma
cells within GALT, where they produce immunoglobulins (Igs) [117]. In the gut of healthy
individuals, these Igs regulate the penetration of microorganisms into the IECs and facilitate
the presentation of antigens to the mucosal immune system, specifically secretory IgA
(SIgAs) and IgM. SIgAs are predominant antibodies in the intestinal lumen, thus being
considered the primary component of intestinal immunity [118]. Its abundance is due
to the fact that TGF-β and retinoic acid released by DCs increase the amount of SIgA
produced by triggering the isotype change of B cells and promoting their cell proliferation
towards plasma cells; similarly, activated PRRs in IECs promote isotype switching [119].
One of the functions of IgAs is to maintain gut microbiota composition and eliminate
pathogenic bacteria [120]. In IBD patients, increased production of IgA, particularly against
pathogenic and colitogenic bacteria, has been found [94,120–122]. However, IgGs also play
a crucial role in neonatal intestinal immunity as maternal IgGs train and develop post-
natal immunity. While it was previously thought that IgGs in adults had less significance
due to their potential to induce unnecessary inflammation, it is now understood that
IgGs are present in the gut wall and serve an essential function in protecting the host
from systemic infections [118,123,124]. Moreover, due to the compromised barrier in IBD
patients, serological IgGs find it easier to infiltrate the intestinal lumen, thus increasing
their presence and, consequently, inflammation [125].

In fact, some studies have revealed a variant in FCGR2A (FcγIIA-R131) responsible
for encoding a receptor that binds to the Fc portion of IgGs with reduced affinity, which has
been identified as protective in UC. Thus, it is proposed that IgGs play a critical pathogenic
role in UC, contributing to intestinal inflammation [118,126,127]. Additionally, FCGR2A,
FCGR3A, and FCGR3B expression is increased in biopsies taken from inflamed areas of UC
patients compared with those in healthy patients. Hence, it is proposed that IgG binding is
related to inflammation and, consequently, the development of UC [126]. Similarly, IBD
patients exhibited higher levels of food-specific and non-commensal-bacteria-specific IgGs
in their serum [118,125,128]. Nevertheless, due to the intensified Th2 response in UC and
Th1 response in CD, the latter condition yields fewer autoantibodies but higher levels of
IgG and IgA against S. cerevisiae, flagellin, and E. coli. Conversely, UC patients generate
more anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) and antibodies against tropomyosin
1 and 5 isoforms [120,129].

Thus, different factors induce immune system dysregulation, triggering an increased
inflammatory immune response and recruiting B and T cells to the lamina propria, which
in turn exacerbate the inflammatory response. Identifying the precise triggers of IBD is
challenging due to its multifactorial nature, involving genetic, immune, microbial, and
environmental factors. Rather than a single trigger, a combination of these elements
interacts to drive the development of the condition. This complexity makes it difficult to
determine whether damage to the intestinal barrier initiates an intensified inflammatory
response or if this barrier damage results from heightened inflammation and changes in the
microbiota. In any case, the immune system’s inability to regulate this inflammation causes
its persistence and chronic spread, culminating in the characteristic IBD symptoms [29,36].
The key aspects of immunological dysregulation during IBD are represented in the

following figure (Figure 3).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

11 of 37

Figure 3. Overview of key inflammatory events initiating inflammation. Initially, environmental,
genetic, and immunological factors disrupt the intestinal epithelial barrier, allowing microbiota
entry into the lamina propria and triggering an inflammatory cascade. Dendritic cells (DCs) and
macrophages recognize pathogens, presenting antigens to T and B cells, resulting in cytokine release.
In Peyer’s patch, a gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), DCs stimulate Th0 cell differentiation
into specific T cell subtypes based on environmental cytokines. B cells produce elevated levels of
immunoglobulins (Igs) A and G in the intestinal lumen, while natural killer (NK) cells promote
autophagy and apoptosis.

2.3. Gut Microbiota Influence

The human microbiota is composed of approximately 1013 to 1014 microorganisms [130–133],
surpassing the total number of human cells. Thus, it is predictable that the microbiota can
be described as a pivotal element in the onset of IBD. This microbiota includes viruses,
archaea, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa [134–136]. The majority of microbiota studies are
focused on bacteria, with the most prevalent phyla being Bacillota (previously known as Fir-
micutes) (Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Ruminococcus, Clostridium), Bacteroidetes
(Prevotella, Porphyromonas), Actinobacteria (Bifidobacteria), and Proteobacteria (Escherichia
coli) [30,137,138]. Consequently, a significant portion of the existing literature pertains to
bacterial aspects.

IECs produce the mucosal barrier to protect the host from microorganisms, reducing
the gut barrier’s permeability and avoiding the contact of microorganisms with immune
cells [139–141]. Nevertheless, microorganisms of a healthy microbiota have a crucial role

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062 11 of 39    Figure 3. Overview of key inﬂammatory events initiating inﬂammation. Initially, environmental, genetic, and immunological factors disrupt the intestinal epithelial barrier, allowing microbiota entry into the lamina propria and triggering an inﬂammatory cascade. Dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages recognize pathogens, presenting antigens to T and B cells, resulting in cytokine release. In Peyer’s patch, a gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), DCs stimulate Th0 cell diﬀerentiation into speciﬁc T cell subtypes based on environmental cytokines. B cells produce elevated levels of immunoglobulins (Igs) A and G in the intestinal lumen, while natural killer (NK) cells promote autophagy and apoptosis. 2.3. Gut Microbiota Inﬂuence The human microbiota is composed of approximately 1013 to 1014 microorganisms [130–133], surpassing the total number of human cells. Thus, it is predictable that the microbiota can be described as a pivotal element in the onset of IBD. This microbiota includes viruses, archaea, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa [134–136]. The majority of microbiota studies are focused on bacteria, with the most prevalent phyla being Bacillota (previously known as Firmicutes) (Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Ruminococcus, Clostridium), Bacteroidetes (Prevotella, Porphyromonas), Actinobacteria (Biﬁdobacteria), and Proteobacteria (Escherichia coli) [30,137,138]. Consequently, a signiﬁcant portion of the existing literature pertains to bacterial aspects. IECs produce the mucosal barrier to protect the host from microorganisms, reducing the gut barrier’s permeability and avoiding the contact of microorganisms with immune Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

12 of 37

in the normal immune response, modulating it and maintaining its homeostasis along
with the intestinal epithelial barrier [134,139,142]. For example, microorganisms of the GI
tract produce important molecules during their metabolism that support host immune
functions, aiding in the cross-talking between IECs and immune cells, but they also avoid
opportunistic infections by niche competition [135,143]. Likewise, they modulate the pro-
duction of certain immune cells, antibodies, and antimicrobial peptides [140]. Besides the
immunological support, they help host intestinal tissue development, nutrient absorption,
metabolic actions, and neurological functions [134,143,144].

For instance, SCFAs, mainly propionate, acetate, and butyrate, are important metabo-
lites produced by the healthy microbiota [131,139,141]. Certain bacteria fermentate com-
plex carbohydrates and create those SCFAs, e.g., Bifidobacteria species, Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, Roseburia intestinalis, and Anaerostipes butyraticus [139]. This metabolite holds
significant relevance due to several characteristics: (1) its abundance; (2) its ability to
activate, regulate, and differentiate various immune cells, including Treg cells, which
elicit an anti-inflammatory response; (3) its direct anti-inflammatory impact, controlling
the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-6, IL-12, and TNF, while promot-
ing the generation of the anti-inflammatory IL-10; (4) its role in protecting against colo-
nization by harmful microorganisms, achieved through actions like pH reduction; (5) its
provision of a carbon source to colonocytes; and (6) its contribution to maintaining the
intestinal barrier integrity by activating G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and reg-
ulating cellular turnover [131,139,140,145]. Specifically, Bifidobacterium produces acetate
at high levels, which binds to GPRCs and reduces NOD and LRR- and pyrin-domain-
containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation with its secretion of IL-18, a crucial
pro-inflammatory cytokine in colon inflammation, as well as acetate, which attenuates
NF-kB expression [139,145]. Interestingly, SCFAs also control gene expression, as they
inhibit histone deacetylases (HDACs), which eliminates acetyls from DNA, inactivating
its gene expression. Conversely, histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, which has the
opposite function, is stimulated, and immune tolerance that produces anti-inflammatory
cell phenotypes is generated [139,140,145].

Commensal bacterial cells also avoid opportunistic or pathogenic bacteria coloniza-
tion by competing for nutrients [30,138]. For instance, residual oxygen consumption by
commensal microbiota is also an essential part of the host defense. The healthy microbiota
is mainly composed of obligate anaerobes but also facultative anaerobes, which consume
that free oxygen, generating an environment without oxygen in which harmful metabo-
lites cannot be produced by certain pathogens, such as the virulence factors of Shigella
flexneri [134,141].

The production of bacteriocins, lactic acid, and hydrogen peroxide is another factor that
directly impacts pathogens and opportunistic microorganisms, along with SCFAs [30,138,146].
Bacteriocins, which are antimicrobial peptides, have the ability to inhibit the growth of
pathogenic bacteria or even cause their death. Notably, bacteriocin producers, predomi-
nantly lactic acid bacteria (LAB) though also found in Bacillus subtilis and Wissella confuse,
exhibit resistance to these antimicrobial agents [138,147,148]. Hydrogen peroxide acts
by damaging proteins, lipids, and DNA of pathogenic bacteria, while LAB possesses
mechanisms to avoid this oxidative stress [149,150].

Patients with IBD are associated with reductions in the total number, diversity, and
richness of microbial species in their gut microbiota compared to a healthy and balanced
microbiota, a phenomenon known as lower α-diversity [151–154]. For instance, Bacil-
lota (especially Clostridium clusters IV and XIV) and Bacteroidota, obligate anaerobes that
produce SCFAs as a part of the commensal microbiota, are found in lower proportions
in patients with IBD, while Pseudomonadota (previously known as Proteobacteria) and
Actinomycetota (Actinobacteria) are present at higher levels [151,153,155]. In fact, Bifidobac-
terium longum, of the class Actinomycetota, has been associated with a protective factor
against UC because it reduces the production of TNF [156].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

13 of 37

Clostridia is the class that has been described to suffer the most important modifi-
cations, decreasing the Roseburia and Faecalibacterium genus (especially Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, the main butyrate producer and anti-inflammatory commensal) [40]. Indeed,
Faecalibacterium has been related to the response to certain biological drugs, such as ustek-
inumab. This is attributed to the increased microbiota diversity observed in patients in
remission 6 weeks post-treatment compared to those with active CD [152,157].

These alterations are also reflected in the fecal microbiota. In samples from patients
with CD, a reduction in the genera Bacteroides, Eubacterium, Faecalibacterium, and Ruminococ-
cus has been observed [158–160]. Conversely, pathogenic microbiota families, such as
Entereobacteriaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, Veillonellaceae, and Pasteurellacaea, have been described
to increase [151,153,161]. Specifically, Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis and
adherent-invasive E. coli increments are related to CD, while Clostridium difficile increase
is associated with relapse and remission states of both CD and UC [40]. Additionally, the
molecular marker (csep1–6bpi) of Campylobacter concisus has been associated with active
CD [152,162]. Furthermore, fecal samples from IBD patients have shown an increase in
sulfate-reducing bacteria, leading to higher hydrogen sulfate production and consequent
inflammatory processes in the intestinal mucosa [151,163].

In addition to bacteria, it is essential to recognize that the microbiota also encompasses
viruses, such as phages, which act as bacterial parasites. Indeed, the gut virome contains
1015 bacteriophages, with Caudovirales, Microviridae, CrAssphages, and Gubaphages rank-
ing among the most abundant. These phages play a pivotal role in shaping the composition
of the bacterial communities and maintaining their stability and composition [164–167].

Viruses also bolster host immunity. For instance, research indicates their ability to
modulate cytokine production or avoid infections; for example, they bind to mucus glyco-
proteins, thereby contributing to the establishment of an antimicrobial barrier that hinders
bacterial infiltration into the lumen [165,168]. However, phages can confer specific char-
acteristics to pathogenic bacteria, heightening their resistance to acidic pH, exemplified
by E. coli infected with bacteriophage ϕ24 [165]. Various factors produced by phages may
adversely impact the immune response, influencing non-commensal adhesion, coloniza-
tion, and production of toxins. As an example, the ankyrin protein (ANKp), encoded
within viruses, facilitates E. coli adherence to IECs, reducing their innate defense against
this pathogen; likewise, adenosine-diphosphate-ribosyltransferases (ADPRTs), enzymes
also encoded in phages, enhance the adherence of Clostridium difficile on the host mu-
cosa [165,169–171]. Regarding IBD, eukaryotic viruses, such as Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
and cytomegalovirus (CMV), have been suggested as markers, but studies exploring this
connection reported inconclusive findings [142].

On the other hand, although fungal microorganisms may be fewer in number com-
pared to bacteria, their larger size renders the mycobiome equally essential to the bacteri-
ome [172]. Similarly to bacteria, commensal fungi of the GI tract may influence host immu-
nity, enhancing the host’s immune development, as well as helping with other functions,
like metabolisms [172,173]. Nonetheless, there is a pressing need for deeper exploration
of commensal fungi and their beneficial contributions to the host, as fungi are predomi-
nantly investigated as pathogens and bacteriomes in supporting the host. The main fungal
phyla found within the GI tract are Ascomycota (constituting 70%), Basidiomycota (30%),
and, occasionally, Zygomicota, with prevalent genera including Candida, Saccharomyces,
Malassezia, Penicillium, Trichosporon, and Cladosporium [132,137,172]. However, in certain
diseases, this proportion is altered. Specifically in IBD, the Basidiomycota/Ascomicota
ratio is increased, as well as the Candida albicans proportion; however, the S. cerevisiae
proportion is decreased [174,175]. Likewise, higher abundance and diversity of fungal mi-
croorganisms are closely related to IBD outbreaks, but researchers cannot identify a specific
species related to IBD onset, as the results show discrepancies [176]. Despite the latter
point, Malasssezia restricta is a fungus associated with CD, which enhances inflammatory
responses via CARD9 signaling [143,173]. Moreover, anti-S. cerevisiae mannan antibodies

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

14 of 37

(ASCAs), which are produced not only against S. cerevisiae but also against C. albicans, are
usually employed as serological biomarkers for IBD [176].

Similarly to fungi, protozoa have been studied as parasites; even so, some also posi-
tively influence human health, such as Blastocystis, Entamoeba, Dientamoeba, and Enteromonas
species [136]. For instance, Blastocystis, the most abundant protozoa in humans, has recently
been found to be common in both healthy and unhealthy individuals, although it has been
also related to certain disorders, such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Additionally, its
presence is closely associated with increased microbial diversity and richness, features
defined as positive for health, suggesting a potential role for Blastocystis in preventing
the colonization of pathogenic bacteria [136,177]. Indeed, some studies found its preva-
lence is lower in IBD and IBS patients than in healthy individuals [136]. Lastly, another
species that is known to be reduced when IBD is active is Dientamoeba fragilis [136,178,179].
However, additional research is still necessary to clarify protozoa functions within the
human microbiota.

Finally, archaea are also part of the human gut microbiota. The predominant archaea are
methanogens, particularly Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methanospharea stadmanae [133,180,181].
These microorganisms establish a positive relationship with gut commensal bacteria by
consuming the excess hydrogen released through anaerobic fermentation; consequently,
anaerobic bacteria increase their ATP synthesis as well as their growth in the gut [182].
However, they have also been linked to IBD, although the results are inconclusive [182].
For example, high levels of M. stadmanae in IBD patients induce TNF and activate DCs,
while M. smithii is related to its remission [133,180]. Another component of the microbiota
identified recently is haloarchaea [182], but further research is also needed to elucidate the
role of this microbiota in the human gut.

The healthy microbiota that supports many host functions can be influenced by in-
ternal and external elements, but, due to its high resilience, it can recover its composition.
These elements include the immune status of the host as an endogenous factor, and, as
later explained, environmental factors, such as diet, infections, or medication intake, as
exogenous ones [139,143,183]. However, when microbial dysbiosis occurs in association
with disruption of the mucus layer, dysregulation of epithelial tight junctions, defects in
the number and function of Paneth cells, and increased intestinal permeability, it results
in increased bacterial exposure [39]. Hence, the balance of the commensal microbiota is
disrupted, the host lacks crucial commensal bacteria, and, simultaneously, it creates an
opportunity for potentially harmful microorganisms to inhabit the space vacated by healthy
ones. These microorganisms are not only exceptionally resilient, but they can cross the
epithelium, eliciting an immune response, causing intestinal inflammation, and promoting
further colonization of the intestine by pathogens [39,40,139,184]. Moreover, detrimental
microorganisms will produce different metabolites and functions in the host, inducing an
aberrant immune response and disrupting the gut barrier. This aberrant immune response
generates inflammation and oxidative stress, characteristic factors seen in IBD [33,138,139].
Likewise, because the intestinal barrier is permeable, microbial molecules may extend to
other organs, generating systemic inflammatory responses and EIMs [4]. Nevertheless, it is
not clear whether these microbial alterations are primary drivers of IBD or secondary to the
underlying intestinal inflammation observed with IBD [39,185]. Indeed, studies in rodents
suggest conflicting findings; some indicate that alterations in the microbiota precede the
onset of the condition, while others propose that specific changes in other factors may
initiate the disease, subsequently leading to alterations in the microbiota [186]. Therefore,
further research is needed to clarify this question and clarify if the microbiota is the cause
or consequence of the disease.

To sum up, the microbiota is related to IBD onset, while it also aids in the differenti-
ation between subtypes of IBD and treatment responsiveness based on the predominant
microorganisms, and predicting the risk of developing more severe disease phenotypes
is among the many potential applications of these findings [33,187]. Nonetheless, the
usefulness of the microbiota in clinical practice is still a long way off, as certain challenges

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

15 of 37

need to be overcome. For instance, the first essential requirement is the classification of
a “beneficial” and “detrimental” gut microbiota to study them along with the generated
metabolites and consider the metabolic variability between strains. Likewise, no standard-
ized protocol for processing and post-processing samples has been defined, which would
definitely help in the unification and normalization of results [187].

2.4. Environmental Factors

The environment is acknowledged for its role in inducing epigenetic changes, which
involve modifying gene expression without directly altering the DNA sequence [188].
Indeed, the influence of the environment on the onset of IBD is evident, as industrialized
regions exhibit higher prevalence and incidence rates of the disease. Moreover, as areas
undergo industrialization, both indices tend to rise [2,3,11].

Among the environmental factors that have been studied to understand the etiology
of IBD, smoking has been extensively studied and described as a risk factor for CD and,
surprisingly, a protective factor for UC [106,189,190]. In addition, in CD patients, smoking
is linked to joint and skin EIMs [4]. Smoking generates contaminants that breach the GI
tract, such as particulate matter, reactive oxygen species producing chemicals, and free
radicals [191,192]. They promote mutations and alter immune system response, mucus
production, autophagy, and gut microbiota diversity [106,193,194]. For example, they have
been associated with an increase in Clostridium abundance and a reduction in the bacte-
ria genus previously named Firmicutes (nowadays included in the unclassified Bacillota
group) [106,194]. Additionally, an association has been observed between smoking and
genetic deficiencies in NOD2 and IL-10. Regarding the protective role of smoking in UC, it
is suggested that nicotine binds to its nicotinic receptors, inducing an anti-inflammatory
response, while carbon monoxide (CO) inhibits DC antigen presentation and T cell pro-
liferation and reduces pro-inflammatory cytokines [191,192]. Consequently, given the
varying expression of receptors along the intestine and the differences in affected areas of
the GI tract between CD and UC, certain receptors could be more abundant in the colon,
thereby acting as a protective factor [191,192]. However, further research is needed to fully
understand the relationship between smoking and IBD.

Another important factor to consider is the diet [46,106,190]. Diet can compromise the
intestinal barrier and trigger pro-inflammatory effects, particularly in Western diets, which
contain high levels of animal fat, sugar, refined carbohydrates, emulsifiers, and chemical
additives but low fiber and vitamin content along with low fish, fruit, and vegetable
intake [38,46,190,195]. While certain foods, like sucrose or nutriment with omega-6 fatty
acids, can exacerbate IBD, others, such as fruits and products with D and B9 vitamins
or omega-3 fatty acids, may offer protective effects against this condition [46,193]. It is
interesting to note that the diet effect is co-founded by the microbiota, as diet determines
the composition and function of the intestinal microbiota, which in turn is relevant to
Indeed, diet is the main environmental factor that modifies the
overall health [196].
microbiota [197]. Therefore, the diet effect on IBD is mediated through both the direct
impact of nutrients and the indirect impact of microbiota changes.

Moreover, some specific dietary items have been associated with either UC or CD but
not both. For example, vegetables and green tea are protective against UC, and fiber intake
has protective effects against CD, while soft drinks are identified as a risk factor for UC,
and lactose maldigestion is related to CD [46,193]. Furthermore, common food production
practices involve the use of additives, pesticides, heavy metals, and other contaminants, con-
tributing to the onset and exacerbation of IBD by altering the gut microbiota [46,106,191].
Indeed, diet plays such a crucial role that specific dietary interventions are used therapeuti-
cally. Examples include exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) [198–200], an anti-inflammatory
diet (IBD-AID) [30,201], an autoimmune protocol diet (AIP) [202,203], a CD exclusion diet
(CDED) [204–206] or UC exclusion diet (UCED) [207,208], a CD-TREAT diet [209,210],
a specific carbohydrate diet (SCD) [30,208,210], a semi-vegetarian diet (SVD) [210,211],

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

16 of 37

and a Mediterranean diet (MD) [17,30,208], which have been proposed as beneficial
dietary strategies.

It is essential to distinguish the restorative and anabolic functions of diet from phar-
macological therapeutic effects. On the one hand, the impact of a beneficial diet affects
the inflammatory state, helping to lower it and thus heal the damaged GI tissue, but also
through beneficial changes in the microbiota that will protect the patient. In other words, it
has a preventive or prophylactic effect. On the other hand, pharmacological treatments are
essential as they act on molecular targets that are developing the pathogenesis of IBD [212].
Antibiotic exposure is another crucial factor in the investigation of IBD [35,106,191].
This factor is particularly meaningful as both developing and developed nations increas-
ingly rely on antibiotics in healthcare, often overusing them, and in livestock, amplifying its
impact on these specific nations [35]. Specifically, this association is stronger for CD, when
employing metronidazole or fluoroquinolones, and when the use of antibiotics is during
childhood [33,190]. Antibiotic exposure’s significance lies in the observed decrease in
microbiota diversity and richness following antibiotic use, although the majority of healthy
microbiotas can be restored after a certain period without antibiotic exposure [33,35,106].
Finally, there are many other factors associated with IBD risk, such as exposure to
viruses [191], psychological stress or stressful events [189,191], contaminants [35,38,191],
chemicals [191], medications, like nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
oral contraceptives [38,190,193], alcohol [189], urban living [35,190,193], the poliomyelitis
vaccine [190,193] and the H1N1 vaccine [190], certain surgeries, like appendectomy or
tonsillectomy, especially for CD [189,190,193], vitamin D deficiency [38,193], cesarean birth
for CD [193], non-Helicobacter pylori-like enterohepatic Helicobacter species [193], sedentary
lifestyle in UC [189], sleep for more than 8 h [189], neuroticism [189], allergy-associated
conditions [189], and hypoxia [35]. Similarly, more protective factors have been described,
such as, for instance, physical activity, particularly for CD, and appendectomy for UC,
even though it is defined as a risk factor for CD [189,190,193]. Other protective factors
are rural living [152], breastfeeding [35,190,193], home and bed-sharing [189,190,193], high
levels of folate [193] and vitamin D [193], contacts with farm animals and pets during
childhood [189,190,193], and H. pylori infection [190,193]. Although body fat is always a
risk factor, interestingly, body mass index (BMI) is a risk factor for CD but a protective
factor against UC [46]. However, it should be noted that the impact of IBD onset varies
among different ethnicities [193].

3. Biological Markers for IBD Diagnosis and Prognosis

Biological markers or biomarkers were defined as “a characteristic that is objectively
measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic pro-
cesses, or pharmacologic responses to a therapeutic intervention” by the Biomarkers Def-
initions Working of the National Institutes of Health. In other words, a biomarker is a
molecule, parameter, or specific element that can be measured in organisms. Additionally,
they are altered in response to specific events within the organism, giving information about
individual health; for example, they provide information about treatment efficacy and
disease subtypes, stages, and prognosis [213]. Biomarkers can be measured in blood (serum
or plasma), tissue, feces, or fluids like sweat, tears, and cerebrospinal fluid [214–216].

Regarding IBD biomarkers, their use is still unclear, as no biomarker can provide a
precise prognosis about the disease course or responsiveness to treatment. This is largely
due to its intricate molecular bases and multifactorial triggers [187,217]. However, certain
biomarkers are being used in clinical routines, such as C reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR), and fecal biomarkers, like calprotectin, even if each of them
presents several drawbacks, e.g., suboptimal accuracy for fecal markers, long half-life and
the influence of multiple factors for ESR, or the elevated heterogeneity in the generation of
CRP [217]. Fortunately, many biomarkers are under research that could be incorporated
into clinical practice as studies clarify their use. In this section, the most studied biomarkers
are discussed (Table 2).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

17 of 37

Table 2. Certain inflammatory bowel disease biomarkers, classification, and associated disease.

Classification

Biomarker

Associated
Disease

References

Genetic and
epigenetic
biomarkers

Serological
biomarkers


Hematological
parameters

Fecal biomarkers

NOD2; PRDM1; NDP52

KIF9-AS1; LINC01272; DIO3OS;
DQ786243; CDKN2B-AS1
(ANRIL); IFNG-AS

miR-21; miR-223; miR-155

miR-375

perinuclear antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA)

Anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae
antibodies (ASCA)

C reactive protein (CRP)

Pro-inflammatory cytokines
(TNF, IL-1β, IL-12, IL,23, etc.)

Anti-OmpC

Pancreatic antibodies (PABs)

Anti-carbohydrate antibodies
(ALCA, ACCA, AMCA)

Cytokine oncostatin M (OSM)

Antibodies anti-membrane
antigens

Leucine-rich α2 glycoprotein
(LRG)

Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR); total white blood cell
(WBC); eosinophil (EOS) count;
platelet (PLT) count

Calprotectin

Lactoferrin

FIT

Calgranulin C (S100A12)

Myeloperoxidase (MPO)

Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs)


IBD

IBD




IBD

IBD




IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

IBD

[218,219]

[220–222]

[223,224]

[220,225]

[220,226,227]

[220,226,228]

[62,67,215,220,
229,230]

[220,228,231]

[231,232]

[231,233–235]

[228,236]

[98]

[214,223]

[223,237]

[220,223,226]

[158,220,238,239]

[216]

[158,238,240]

[220,241,242]

[220,243]

3.1. Genetic and Epigenetic Biomarkers

The relationship between specific genes and the etiology of IBD has been extensively
explored in recent years, capitalizing on valuable insights gleaned from genome studies.
As explained above, the association of the NOD2 gene with CD has been well-documented,
emerging as a pivotal predictive factor and linked to heightened disease complications [232].
Furthermore, individuals exhibiting genetic variability in the PRDM1 and NDP52 genes
have shown susceptibility to CD [232]. The genes KIF9-AS1, LINC01272, and DIO3OS have
demonstrated utility in distinguishing and detecting various types of IBDs [218]. Addi-
tionally, genes like DQ786243, CDKN2B-AS1 (ANRIL), and IFNG-AS, among numerous
others, have been implicated in IBDs [219], warranting further investigation to enhance our
understanding and management of these conditions.

In addition to genetic markers, Microribonucleic acid or miRNAs, a group of small,
single-stranded RNA molecules typically about 22 nucleotides in length, can also be

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

18 of 37

candidates to be used as markers for IBD [219,220,228]. Generally, their sensitivity value is
0.8, and their specificity value is 0.84 [217]. They circulate with remarkable stability and they
are conserved in blood, but they can also be found in urine, feces, and saliva, as well as in
biopsies of intestinal tissues [220,232,244]. Their expression is linked to various pathologies,
including IBD [220,228,244]. Among the most relevant miRNAs found to be overexpressed
in IBD in various studies are miR-21, miR-223, and miR-155, implicating them in the
etiology and development of the disease [220–222]. Additionally, overexpression of miR-
375 has been studied in patients with UC compared to those with CD and patients without
IBDs [223,224], suggesting its potential use as a biomarker to differentiate between different
types of IBDs.

3.2. Blood Biomarkers

pANCA and ASCA: pANCA constitutes a group of autoantibodies that target compo-
nents within the neutrophil cytoplasm [228,245], and ASCA comprise antibodies primarily
directed against the mannan of the cell wall of S. cerevisiae yeast [232]. Several studies
have observed pANCA positivity in 60–70% of sera from UC patients, compared to lower
percentages in sera from CD patients (15%) [220,225]. Conversely, ASCA positivity in CD
patient sera ranges from 50 to 60%, while in UC patient sera and healthy subject sera,
positivity to these antibodies is much lower (5–14% and <5%, respectively) [220,226,227]. It
was determined that the pANCA sensitivity value is 0.33 and the specificity value is 0.97
for differentiating between IBD and non-IBD, while the ASCA diagnostic performance has
sensitivity and specificity values of 0.4 and 0.92, respectively [217].

Several studies have shown that utilizing both antibodies together enhances and com-
plements their diagnostic power [220,226,228,232,245,246]. Patients positive for pANCA
and negative for ASCA (ASCA−/pANCA+) could be diagnosed with UC with a sensi-
tivity of 78% and a specificity of 67%, whereas those negative for pANCA and positive
for ASCA (ASCA+/pANCA−) could be diagnosed with CD with a sensitivity of 67%
and a specificity of 78% [220,247]. However, other studies suggest varying specificity and
sensitivity values [246,248,249]. Furthermore, the combination of these antibodies has
demonstrated value in diagnosing patients with indeterminate colitis among the different
IBD subtypes, CD or UC [226,246]. Elevated pANCA levels have been associated with
more severe UC phenotypes, as well as treatment resistance, which could aid in identifying
patients requiring early surgical intervention or immunosuppressive treatment [232,250].
Conversely, elevated ASCA levels have been linked to an earlier onset of the disease and a
more fibrostenotic pattern [228,251].

CRP is a pentameric protein synthesized by hepatocytes stimulated by the release of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) [220,226,228].
During acute inflammation, infection, or trauma phases, CRP levels considerably increase,
while under normal conditions they remain very low (<1 mg/L), making them widely used
as a serum biomarker for inflammation [228]. In patients with IBD, elevated CRP levels
have been associated with more severe histological phenotypes of the disease [220] and a
higher likelihood of requiring colectomy [226], aiding in distinguishing between active and
inactive IBD [232]. In contrast, decreasing levels have been linked to disease remission [228]
as well as a favorable response to treatment with biosimilars, such as infliximab [220]. It is
worth noting that increased levels of CRP are found in various inflammation and infection
processes, so it is not specific to IBD; thus, its use as a biomarker needs to be complemented
with other, more specific diagnostic tests.

Regarding pro-inflammatory cytokines, several of them are involved in the etiology
of IBDs, among which TNF plays a pivotal role. This molecule is primarily expressed by
active lymphocytes and macrophages [67], and it is linked to various processes, such as
immune stimulation and resistance to tumors and infections, by activating neutrophils,
macrophages, and other components of the innate immune system [220]. High levels
of TNF have been observed in serum, feces, and mucosa samples from patients with
IBDs [62]. Additionally, it has been associated with inflammation present in the mucosa of

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

19 of 37

UC patients [220]. The use of TNF-neutralizing therapies, such as biosimilars, has proven
to be a promising strategy in the management and control of these conditions.

In addition to TNF, numerous other pro-inflammatory cytokines released by mono-
cytes, macrophages, neutrophils, DCs, and B cells are implicated in IBDs, such as IL-12 [229],
IL-23 [230], IL-1β [215], IL-6, and IL-17, among others [220], some of which are being used
as therapeutic targets to monitor IBD [230]. Indeed, one of the effects of TNF is to increase
the production of these pro-inflammatory cytokines during IEC damage, which bind to
their receptor on cells to activate both innate and adaptative immune responses, stimulating
cells like T cells and NK cells [82,229].

Cytokine oncostatin M (OSM): OSM is a compact bundle of four helices crafted from
a single polypeptide belonging to the IL-6 family [252,253]. It is produced by various
cell types, predominantly hematopoietic cells and stromal cells [252,254], and it has been
associated with the suppression of growth in several tumor cell lines. Elevated levels of
this cytokine and its receptor (OSMR) have been observed in patients and first-degree
relatives of patients with IBD compared to healthy individuals and their relatives [228,236],
correlating with higher degrees of inflammation and disease gravity. Additionally, its
relationship with the therapeutic response to anti-TNF biosimilars has been reported,
linking it to a poorer treatment response [223,252,254]. However, it is still unclear whether
this association is solely related to the levels present in the mucosa or those present in the
serum, necessitating confirmatory studies [236,252,254].

Anti-outer membrane protein C (anti-OmpC): anti-OmpC is an antibody directed
against porin C, a transport protein on the outer membrane of E. coli [231,232]. The
presence of IgA antibodies against these antigens has been predominantly determined in
the sera of CD patients, with a prevalence of 55%, whereas in cases of UC patients, non-IBD
colitis, and healthy individuals, the prevalence was much lower. This suggests that the
presence of these antibodies could be useful in differentiating CD patients from other
types of aforementioned diseases [220,228,231]. Furthermore, the presence of anti-OmpC
antibodies has been associated with a higher likelihood of having internal perforating CD,
and thus requiring surgery [228,246].

Pancreatic antibodies (PABs): PABs target the exocrine tissue of the pancreas. The main
antigens recognized by these antibodies include glycoprotein 2 (GP2), CUB, and similar
domains to zona pellucida 1 (CUZD1) [228,255,256]. PABs can be useful in distinguishing
between patients with CD and UC, as they are detected in the sera of CD patients at a rate
of 30%, whereas their prevalence in UC patients and the sera of healthy individuals is very
low [231,232]. This difference arises because it is suggested that the inflammation caused
by the release of anti-GP2 antibodies is primarily located in the ileum rather than the colon
due to the abundance of GP2 in the M cells of the small intestine but scarce presence in the
colon [228,257]. Moreover, the high specificity (96%) of anti-MZGP2 antibodies, an isoform
of GP2, has been demonstrated for CD, associating it with early disease onset and more
severe phenotypes [228,232,258].

Regarding CUZD1, the presence of anti-CUZD1 antibodies in the sera from CD patients
is much higher than in UC patients, and its positivity is associated with ileocolonic and
perianal lesions [228,259]. Despite the aforementioned findings, their use in diagnosing and
distinguishing IBD must be cautious and complemented with other diagnostic techniques.
Anti-carbohydrate antibodies: This group of antibodies consists of IgG anti-
laminaribioside carbohydrate antibody (ALCA), IgA anti-chitobioside carbohydrate anti-
body (ACCA), and IgG antimannobioside carbohydrate antibody (AMCA), along with pre-
viously mentioned ASCA [228,232,260]. They target carbohydrate epitopes present in the
cell walls of certain bacteria and fungi. Studies have shown higher levels of these antibodies
in patients with CD compared to patients with UC or healthy individuals [231,233–235].
However, there is uncertainty regarding their diagnostic utility in differentiating between
IBDs when used in conjunction with ASCA [228,231,261].

Antibodies anti-membrane antigens: Recent studies have underscored the pivotal
role of reactive antibodies generated against membrane antigens in the early detection of

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

20 of 37

autoimmune diseases, such as IBD, as well as their significance in monitoring, managing
these conditions, and influencing treatment outcomes. While further research in this
specific area is warranted, promising findings have emerged. In this context, increased
reactivity of sera from patients with autoimmune disease, including UC, to kidney and
spleen membrane antigens has recently been reported using cell membrane microarrays of
different origins [98].

Leucine-rich α2 glycoprotein (LRG) is a 50 kDa protein consisting of eight leucine-rich
domains that is produced in cells, e.g., neutrophils and macrophages, in response to pro-
inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF, IL-1β, and IL-6, and cytokine-stimulated neutrophils.
Specifically, in IBD patients, damaged IECs also release this protein into the serum, being a
great biomarker reflecting intestinal inflammation more than CRP. Moreover, it seems to be
correlated with fecal calprotectin (FC). Nonetheless, it is also increased in colorectal cancer
and gastric cancer, where the GI tract is also inflamed [214,223].

Other serological biomarkers: There have been numerous others biomarkers studied,
including nitric oxide (NO) [220], Th17 signature cytokine IL-17A (IL-17A) [254], IL-7 re-
ceptor (IL-7R) [254], Anti-Integrin αvβ6 antibody (αvβ6 antibody) [223], Anti-granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (antiGM-CSF) [228], Anti-I2 antibody [228], Alpha-1
antitrypsin (AAT) [232], granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) [232], Suppression
of tumorigenicity 2 (ST2) [220], and TNF alpha-induced protein 6 (TNFAIP6) [220], among
many others. These markers have been found to be elevated in the serum of IBD patients,
and their investigation could be valuable to better understand and manage this disease.

Additionally, beyond molecular-based biomarkers, parameters, such as ESR level [223,237]
and total white blood cell (WBC) [237], eosinophil (EOS) [237], and platelet (PLT) counts [237],
are being used. Among them, ESR is the most-used test in clinical practice. It has been
used to detect and monitor inflammatory activity since the 1920s. However, CRP is more
employed because this protein changes quicker than the ESR parameter. Moreover, it is
not specific as it can be caused not only by IBD but also other autoimmune disorders,
tumors, and infections. Despite its lack of specificity, this assay is low-cost, reproducible,
and combined with other tests can be useful [223,262,263].

3.3. Fecal Biomarkers

Fecal calprotectin: Fecal alprotectin is a heterodimeric protein belonging to the S100
family, which plays a crucial role in the mechanisms underlying both acute and chronic
inflammation [220,226]. It is primarily secreted by neutrophils and exhibits antimicro-
bial activity by competing for zinc, a nutrient utilized by bacteria, thereby limiting their
growth [264]. Elevated levels of calprotectin have been found in samples of feces, serum,
and other fluids from patients with IBD compared to those obtained from healthy individu-
als, with the most substantial differences observed in fecal samples. Consequently, fecal
calprotectin has been widely utilized as a biomarker for inflammatory states (sensitivity
0.88 and specificity 0.8) [217,220,226]. Additionally, calprotectin found in fecal samples can
provide a measure of specific intestinal inflammation, whereas that obtained from other
fluids offers a more general measure of body inflammation [223]. Despite being a stable
biomarker, the presence of elevated calprotectin levels in other pathological conditions
renders it nonspecific, thereby precluding its use solely as a biomarker for diagnosing IBD.
Fecal lactoferrin: It is a multifunctional iron-binding glycoprotein found in various
exocrine secretions, such as saliva, sweat, and mucosal secretions, among others [158,220].
It has a key role in immunity, being released in large quantities by neutrophils at sites
of inflammation during infections caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, yeasts, and other
pathogens [220,238,239]. Elevated levels of lactoferrin have been observed in patients
with IBD compared to healthy individuals, indicating a correlation between lactoferrin
levels and the degree of inflammation observed through mucosal endoscopies (sensitivity
0.82 and specificity 0.95) [158,217,220,238,239]. This correlation suggests a potential utility
in assessing inflammation levels in these patients, leading to superior disease manage-
ment strategies.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

21 of 37

Calgranulin C (also known as S100A12): It is a pro-inflammatory protein predomi-
nantly secreted by neutrophils, belonging to the S100 protein family [265]. This protein ex-
hibits antimicrobial properties attributed to its ability to chelate metals, which are essential
nutrients for many microorganisms. By sequestering these metals, calgranulin C restricts
their availability to pathogenic microorganisms, thereby impeding their growth [238,240].
Elevated levels of this pro-inflammatory protein have been consistently observed in the
serum, mucous membranes, and fecal samples of patients with IBD compared to healthy
individuals [158,238,240]. Notably, calgranulin C demonstrates uniform distribution within
fecal samples and remarkable stability, persisting for up to 7 days at room temperature and
withstanding degradation by fecal bacteria [265,266]. Moreover, a significant correlation
has been established between calgranulin levels and the severity of both the disease and
mucosal inflammation in IBD patients. These distinctive characteristics position calgranulin
C as a promising candidate for an IBD biomarker; however, its clinical utility remains, as
S100A12 has also been implicated in other inflammatory conditions [158,220,238].

Myeloperoxidase (MPO): MPO is a peroxidase present in many cells throughout the
body, predominantly in neutrophils and immature monocytes [220,267,268]. Its cytotoxic
action stems from catalyzing the reaction between hydrogen peroxide and chloride in the
extracellular medium, resulting in the formation of hypochlorous acid, a highly oxidizing
species effective in eliminating bacteria, fungi, and various other pathogenic microorgan-
isms [220,267,268]. Furthermore, it has been linked to autoimmune inflammatory diseases
due to its direct association with neutrophils and their role in inflammatory mechanisms.
Its role in IBD has been extensively studied, with fecal levels of this enzyme correlating with
increased severity of the pathology [220,241,242]. Additionally, its presence in intestinal
mucosa can also be utilized for monitoring purposes in patients undergoing treatment for
UC. Moreover, the increased presence of 3-chlorotyrosine (3-Cl-Tyr), a modification product
obtained through the reaction of hypochlorous acid with tyrosine residues, has been ob-
served in the colons of IBD patients [242,268]. Given the above explanation, investigating
MPO as a biomarker in IBD holds promise for clinical utility.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs): Human MMPs constitute a group of 24 zinc-
dependent endopeptidases classified according to their substrate preference and domain
structure into collagenases, gelatinases, stromelysins, and membrane-type MMPs. MMPs
are involved in various processes, including extracellular matrix processing and facilitating
the migration of inflammatory mediators to sites of damage [243,269,270].

Studies have revealed an increase in the levels of MMPs, specifically MMP1, MMP2,
MMP9, and MMP13, in the intestinal mucosa and faces of patients with IBD compared
to healthy individuals [220,243]. This increase is particularly observed in the inflamed
mucosa of patients with IBD, both UC and CD, in contrast to healthy individuals and the
non-inflamed mucosa of IBD patients [220,243].

Furthermore, an elevation in MMP9 levels has been observed in the sera of patients
with active UC and CD compared to healthy subjects and inactive CD and UC [271].
Additionally, fecal MMP9 levels have shown high sensitivity and specificity in identifying
UC patients with endoscopic activity, although the values obtained for CD were not
sufficiently accurate for diagnosing this disease [220].

Other fecal biomarkers: Numerous other fecal markers have been studied for IBD,
including polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN)-elastase [232], neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin (NGAL) (also known as lipocalin-2) [220,241], intestinal alkaline phos-
phatase (IAP) [220], and M2-pyruvate kinase (M2-PK) [244], among others.

Other frequently used biomarkers include the fecal immunochemical test (FIT) and

urinary prostaglandin E-major urinary metabolite (PGE-MUM) [216].

3.4. Biomarker Evaluation Techniques

The primary method of protein detection is the enzyme-linked immunosorbent as-
say (ELISA). It is an enzyme immunoassay that employs a capture antibody to bind the
biomarker and a specific detection antibody to recognize it. This recognition event enables

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

22 of 37

the detection of the bound biomarker using a conjugated enzyme, which catalyzes a re-
action generating a measurable product. The quantity of this product correlates with the
concentration of the biomarker in the sample. Additional common techniques for protein
detection include fluorescent-based immunoassays (FIAs), radioimmunoassay (RIA), West-
ern blot (WB), and mass spectrometry (MR) [213]. FIA and RIA working principles are
similar to ELISA but differ in the label used, as RIA employs radiolabels and FIA fluorescent
compounds. Western blot separates protein homogenates through electrophoresis to sub-
sequently transfer onto a nitrocellulose or nylon membrane through electro-blotting and,
finally, incubate with labeled antibodies to quantify the obtained bands of proteins or detect
a particular antigen [272]. Lastly, MS is based on protein identification and quantification
based on their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). For this purpose, proteins are enzymatically
digested, ionized, and accelerated and its mass spectrum is defined. This mass spectrum is
analyzed and matched through a search algorithm to determine the proteins present in the
sample and their quantity. Additionally, it is a versatile method that can be used for other
biomolecules like RNA, DNA, and lipids [273,274].

Besides proteins, biomarkers also encompass DNA and RNA, which are invaluable
molecules for study. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) stands out as the primary technique
for analyzing DNA and RNA, with variations like reverse transcription–PCR and real-
time PCR offering diverse applications. Additionally, northern blot and DNA microarray
methods are also employed for this purpose [213]. Notably, microbiota analysis often
involves studying 16S RNA in prokaryotic and 18S RNA in eukaryotic microorganisms,
which is particularly important when microorganisms cannot be grown in specific culture
media [143].

Despite many other techniques under development, such as cell membrane microar-
ray [98], protein microarray [275,276], or sensors [215,277], the aforementioned methods are
frequently utilized in hospital settings. Microarray technology is based on the immobiliza-
tion of certain molecules (ssDNA, ssRNA, proteins, or cell membrane homogenates) on a
surface in order to detect the biomarkers of the sample according to the specific recognition
between them and the immobilized molecule. Notably, cell membrane microarrays enable
personalized medicine by allowing for the immobilization and longitudinal study of a
patient’s own biopsies [95]. For genetic biomarker detection, DNA microarrays usually
label DNA or RNA samples with fluorescent ligands, and in protein and cell membrane
microarrays, conjugated detection antibodies are employed [98,278].

4. Therapeutic Targets and Treatments in IBD

As IBD has no cure yet, its therapeutic options are mainly based on the control of
inflammatory symptoms [14,279]. Treatment options include corticosteroids, aminosalicy-
lates, immunosuppressants, and biological drugs [14,15,21].

Aminosalicylates, such as 5-aminosalicylic (5-ASA), present multiple anti-inflammatory
and immunomodulatory actions [14,279,280]. They inhibit lipoxygenase and cyclooxyge-
nase (interfering in the generation of pro-inflammatory products), remove reactive oxygen
species, prevent the recruitment of immune cells and cytokine formation, and induce Treg
through TGF-β anti-inflammatory cytokine production [14,280]. They serve as a primary
treatment option for UC patients with mild to moderate disease [280]. In the same line,
corticosteroids (CSs), like budesonide, decrease the anomalous immune response, reducing
the pro-inflammatory cytokines’ release [14,279,280]. Hence, they act as broad-spectrum
systemic anti-inflammatory therapies that achieve the control of inflammation. They are
effective for moderate to severe UC and CD patients during short-term treatments, as
long-term treatment generates undesirable adverse effects. Nonetheless, second-generation
CSs have been developed in order to reduce these adverse effects [280].

Other immunomodulators, such as thiopurines or methotrexate, interfere with the
biosynthesis of nucleosides or are directly analogous to them, damaging the DNA of the
cells and specifically inhibiting T cell proliferation and pro-inflammatory cytokines in

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

23 of 37

IBD [14,280,281]. They are used when CSs or aminosalicylates do not work or along with
anti-TNF treatment to reduce the production of anti-biological antibodies [280].

Other types of therapeutical options are biological drugs, also known as biologics,
which are antibodies directed against pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF (infliximab or adali-
mumab), IL-12 (ustekinumab), and IL-23 (ustekinumab, risankizumab, or mirikizumab) or
inhibitors of integrin (vedolizumab, natalizumab, or etrolizumab), a glycoprotein receptor
of the cell surfaces [14,279,282]. Biologics targeting integrins prevent leukocytes from infil-
trating the intestine. Therefore, anti-integrins, along with those that target pro-inflammatory
cytokines, contribute to reducing the inflammatory response in the intestine [14,67]. They
aid many IBD patients who are unresponsive to conventional anti-inflammatory and im-
munomodulator therapies. These medications are more specific than conventional ones
targeting specific cytokines or receptors that cause the characteristic inflammation. Nowa-
days, they have been used as a primary treatment in specific clinical scenarios [280].

The next developed therapeutic groups were small-molecule drugs (SMDs), being
the next generation of immunomodulators. They are exemplified by tofacitinib, an oral
small-molecule Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor. Regarding tofacitinib, it inhibits JAK-1, JAK-2,
and JAK-3; consequently, gamma-chain-containing cytokines are also inhibited [14,280,283].
It is also effective in blocking T cells and NK cells, as well as modulating pro-inflammatory
cytokines [280].

Additionally, because the microbiota is an essential part of IBD onset, the use of an-
tibiotics, probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, and postbiotics is a useful novel therapy, along
with fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) [14]. Antimicrobials are used to eliminate
pathogenic invasion, but they should be short-termed, as they produce resistance, in ad-
dition to the possible use of phage therapy [13,33,280]. However, probiotics, prebiotics,
synbiotics, postbiotics, and FMT support the improvement of the microbiota, achieving the
maintenance of the commensal microbiota [14,33]. Therefore, while microbiota beneficial ef-
fects can be restored in IBD patients using those strategies, the specific relationship between
beneficial and harmful microbiotas is still being researched, making these approaches less
effective than traditional therapies.

Finally, some other options to manage the disease are not based on medications, such
as surgical interventions [13,14], nutritional treatment [283–285], botanical treatment [13],
stem cell transplantation [14], and apheresis treatment [14], among others.

Regarding EIM treatment, the European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO)
made a guideline for standardizing them [286]. One out of two patients suffer from
EIMs at some point, meaning these symptoms must also be considered in their treat-
ment. Additionally, manifestations, such as primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) or venous
thromboembolic events (VTE), are associated with high mortality [286].

For the treatment of VTE, the use of direct oral anticoagulants is recommended, as
well as preventive treatment in patients hospitalized due to acute medical illness or major
surgery with heparin or fondaparinux. For the treatment of PSC, ursodeoxycholic acid
is recommended to improve liver biochemistry, although its effect on the disease itself is
unknown [286].

Treatment for other EIMs is also important due to their morbidity. For instance, IBD-
related arthritis is managed with NSAIDs or cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-specific inhibitors
for short-term treatment. Oral aphthous ulcers are recommended to be treated with support-
ive mouth care, including topical steroids, along with the treatment of IBD itself. Pyoderma
gangrenosum is suggested to be treated using anti-TNF biologics, specifically infliximab. It
can also be treated with systemic and topical steroids, ciclosporin, ustekinumab, dapsone,
metronidazole, topical calcineurin inhibitors, and tetracyclines. Anemia, the most common
EIM of IBD, is managed by determining the etiology of the condition and treating the
underlying deficiency or pathology. For example, iron deficiency anemia is treated with
oral and intravenous iron, and megaloblastic anemia is treated with vitamin B12 and folate
supplementation [286].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

24 of 37

However, some EIMs require more complex treatment. For instance, fatigue is an
intricate symptom to treat, as its etiology in IBD is still under research. Therefore, physicians
should investigate the underlying altered mechanisms to treat them effectively. Likewise,
psychosocial interventions and anti-TNF biologicals are recognized as useful tools for
reducing fatigue, whereas CSs and immunomodulators may exacerbate it [286].

5. Current Challenges

After assessing the primary molecular bases, biomarkers, and available therapeutic
options for IBD, a SWOT analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats) was
conducted (Table 3) to evaluate the present state of managing this condition.

Table 3. SWOT analysis of the current state of IBD management.

Weaknesses

Strengths









Unknown etiology
Relapses and remission of the disease
Lack of specific biomarkers to determine
clinical severity of the disease
Difficulty in diagnosing disease subtypes
Lack of early detection of flare-ups
Absence of real-time monitoring
High-cost monitoring methods
Lack of curative treatment
Variability of responses to IBD treatments
Treatment resistance and loss of response
No concise therapeutic aim
Lack of sequential therapy strategy

Threats

Potential for misinterpretation of
biomarker data
Uncertainty regarding the long-term
efficacy and safety of new treatments
Regulatory challenges in approving new
treatments
Limited funding for research and
development
Challenges in educating healthcare
professionals and patients about new
advancements
Lack of patient perspective
Treatment of inflammation only













Effective monitoring through ELISA
Specific treatment options available
Novel therapeutic strategies under
development
Introduction of wearable sensors for
real-time monitoring
Personalized diagnostic methods under
development
New pharmacological treatments
Artificial intelligence improves IBD
diagnosis and patient care management
Digitalization allows for remote
monitoring of patient’s treatment

Opportunities

Exploration of the disease’s etiology to
identify new treatment targets
Identification of new specific biomarkers
for diagnosis and patient stratification
Development of real-time monitoring
technologies
Identification of cost-effective monitoring
methods
Strategies to minimize relapses and
maintain remission
Personalized treatment approaches
Potential for biosimilar
self-administration
Efficiency analysis
Comparison of new drug compounds
Strategies with new drugs

From this evaluation, the main challenges encountered lie in the unclear definition
of specific factors that trigger IBD. Multiple interconnected elements from the genetics,
immune system, microbiota, and environment contribute to the development of IBD.
Consequently, there is no specific therapeutic option to cure this disorder, leading to the
prescription of symptomatic treatments. However, these treatments frequently result in
non-response or resistance, particularly with biological medications where anti-biologic
antibodies can be developed. Continuous monitoring of therapeutic response and resistance
is urgently needed to adjust treatment strategies and achieve disease remission, alongside
the development of more potent therapies.

While the biomarkers’ follow-up relies on the ELISA technique as the gold-standard
method, it has inherent limitations. One major hurdle is its lack of individualized and
personalized configuration. ELISA assays typically utilize a 96-well plate configuration,

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

25 of 37

which, while cost-effective for analyzing numerous samples simultaneously, can present
challenges during acute disease flare-ups. In such instances, patients may face delays in
accessing crucial diagnostic information as they await the accumulation of a sufficient
number of samples for testing to occur.

In light of these limitations, novel techniques that overcome these challenges by of-
fering faster, simpler, individualized, cost-effective solutions with improved sensitivity
have been proposed. Microarray is a polyvalent technology that meets all of the mentioned
characteristics, as it allows for the immobilization of proteins (such as antibodies [275,287],
cytokines, and microbial protein extracts [276]) and cell membranes [98], enabling the devel-
opment of a comprehensive, robust, small, sensitive, and customized panel of biomarkers.
This technique enables the simultaneous evaluation of multiple biomarkers, while also
being adaptable to point-of-care (POC) methodologies. Another potential method for POC
devices is giant magnetoresistant (GMR) biosensors. These sensors offer versatility in
configuration, leading to the development of multiple types of GMR sensors tailored to fit
the specific aim of biomedical applications. Among these, flexible GMR sensors stand out
for their wearable biosensing option [288].

Because biomarkers rise in the time before disease remission occurs, methods that
detect them in real time would aid in the prognosis of the disease by controlling and
alleviating the predicted symptoms. For this purpose, a small sensor device can be useful
in continuous detection for anticipating the biological events that trigger inflammation.
For instance, screen-printed electrodes (SPEs) based on electrochemical reactions [289]
or temperature sensors [277] have been developed. Nonetheless, it is crucial to maintain
real-time monitoring for clinical applications. The complexity of empowering patients to
manage their own disease and treatment is particularly evident in conditions like IBD,
where the underlying causes remain elusive. There is still much to learn in both basic and
applied knowledge of IBD, and progress will likely continue for many years to come.

In addition to these assays, clinical tools are an essential part of IBD management. In
this sense, imaging techniques are also vital in acquiring relevant information, including,
for example, plain radiography, barium contrast studies, ultrasonography, CT, or MRI [290].
Among these, ultrasound stands out for its high accuracy in diagnosis, disease evaluation,
and monitoring. It is a non-invasive and cost-effective technique that does not require
specific preparation, and it can be used as a POC device. Hence, ultrasounds could replace
other clinical tools that are invasive, expensive, and complicated, such as CT or MRI [291].
Likewise, this tool is capable of being applied to primary care settings. Nonetheless,
those clinical approaches are often reserved for specialized care settings. Consequently,
primary care professionals lack helpful tools that aid in IBD management, which hinders
the diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of IBD, ultimately decreasing the well-being of
patients as the diagnosis is delayed and their symptomatology is not correctly controlled
until the patient arrives at the specialist [20,292]. Additionally, these delays in diagnosis
seem to increase the probability of developing a more complicated form of the disease [20].
Therefore, improving diagnosis, biomarker detection, and monitoring would enhance
the quality of life of patients who are usually constantly suffering from flare-ups owing
to incorrect treatment dosage, among other causes [293]. However, there is still a lack of
concern about patients’ perspectives regarding treatment. For instance, treatment is usually
focused on inflammatory symptoms, while the main concerns of the patients are often the
psychosocial symptoms, such as fatigue, which are usually more debilitating for them than
intestinal ones [294]. Moreover, these symptoms are still unclear and not fully understood
by health professionals, being less studied even though they are already associated with a
lower quality of life and psychological well-being, along with other issues, such as pain or
anemia [294]. In short, addressing the unmet treatment needs of patients is essential for
ultimately improving their quality of life.

In conclusion, researchers typically focus on improving diagnostic tools and treatments
to advance the clinical field of IBD, which becomes highly valuable when their innovations
are finally at the disposal of physicians. However, they may sometimes overlook the real

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

26 of 37

concerns and unmet needs of patients. Often, patients do not necessarily need new and
sophisticated diagnostic and prognostic methods, as their main symptoms are already
managed effectively with current approaches. Instead, they require specific attention to
the overlooked manifestations of the disease, which can be more debilitating than the
principal symptoms.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.D.-M. and G.B.-G.; writing—original draft preparation,
E.D.-M., L.H.-S., C.M.-V. and L.M.-S.; writing—review and editing, E.D.-M., L.H.-S., C.M.-V., L.M.-S.,
A.R.-G. and G.B.-G.; visualization, E.D.-M. and L.M.-S.; supervision, A.R.-G. and G.B.-G.; project
administration, G.B.-G.; funding acquisition, E.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research was funded by the Basque Government Department of Economic Devel-
opment, Sustainability and Environment Bikaintek program, grant number 006-B2/2021 and 004-
B2/2022; the University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, grant number PIFIND21/02; and by
post-doctoral funding for doctoral Research Staff Improvement by the Basque Government, grant
reference POS_2023_1_0026.

Conflicts of Interest: Eguzkiñe Diez-Martin, Leidi Hernandez-Suarez, Egoitz Astigarraga, and
Gabriel Barreda-Gómez were employed by IMG Pharma Biotech S.L. The remaining authors declare
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

References

1. McDowell, C.; Farooq, U.; Haseeb, M. Inflammatory Bowel Disease. In StatPearls; StatPearls Publishing: Treasure Island, FL,






USA, 2024.
Caviglia, G.P.; Garrone, A.; Bertolino, C.; Vanni, R.; Bretto, E.; Poshnjari, A.; Tribocco, E.; Frara, S.; Armandi, A.; Astegiano, M.;
et al. Epidemiology of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: A Population Study in a Healthcare District of North-West Italy. J. Clin.
Med. 2023, 12, 641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhou, J.-L.; Bao, J.-C.; Liao, X.-Y.; Chen, Y.-J.; Wang, L.-W.; Fan, Y.-Y.; Xu, Q.-Y.; Hao, L.-X.; Li, K.-J.; Liang, M.-X.; et al. Trends and
Projections of Inflammatory Bowel Disease at the Global, Regional and National Levels, 1990–2050: A Bayesian Age-Period-Cohort
Modeling Study. BMC Public Health 2023, 23, 2507. [CrossRef]
Rogler, G.; Singh, A.; Kavanaugh, A.; Rubin, D.T. Extraintestinal Manifestations of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Current
Concepts, Treatment, and Implications for Disease Management. Gastroenterology 2021, 161, 1118–1132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lu, Q.; Yang, M.; Liang, Y.; Xu, J.; Xu, H.; Nie, Y.; Wang, L.; Yao, J.; Li, D. Immunology of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Molecular
Mechanisms and Therapeutics. J. Inflamm. Res. 2022, 15, 1825–1844. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Flynn, S.; Eisenstein, S. Inflammatory Bowel Disease Presentation and Diagnosis. Surg. Clin. N. Am. 2019, 99, 1051–1062.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

7. M’Koma, A.E. Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Clinical Diagnosis and Surgical Treatment-Overview. Medicina 2022, 58, 567.



[CrossRef]
Satsangi, J.; Silverberg, M.S.; Vermeire, S.; Colombel, J. The Montreal Classification of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Controversies,
Consensus, and Implications. Gut 2006, 55, 749–753. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Silverberg, M.S.; Satsangi, J.; Ahmad, T.; Arnott, I.D.R.; Bernstein, C.N.; Brant, S.R.; Caprilli, R.; Colombel, J.-F.; Gasche, C.;
Geboes, K.; et al. Toward an Integrated Clinical, Molecular and Serological Classification of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Report
of a Working Party of the 2005 Montreal World Congress of Gastroenterology. Can. J. Gastroenterol. J. Can. Gastroenterol. 2005, 19
(Suppl. A), 5A–36A. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

10. Lee, H.-S.; Cleynen, I. Molecular Profiling of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Is It Ready for Use in Clinical Decision-Making? Cells

2019, 8, 535. [CrossRef]

11. Wang, R.; Li, Z.; Liu, S.; Zhang, D. Global, Regional and National Burden of Inflammatory Bowel Disease in 204 Countries and
Territories from 1990 to 2019: A Systematic Analysis Based on the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. BMJ Open 2023, 13,
e065186. [CrossRef]
Salvador-Martín, S.; Zapata-Cobo, P.; Velasco, M.; Palomino, L.M.; Clemente, S.; Segarra, O.; Sánchez, C.; Tolín, M.; Moreno-
Álvarez, A.; Fernández-Lorenzo, A.; et al. Association between HLA DNA Variants and Long-Term Response to Anti-TNF Drugs
in a Spanish Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease Cohort. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 1797. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

12.

13. Yeshi, K.; Ruscher, R.; Hunter, L.; Daly, N.L.; Loukas, A.; Wangchuk, P. Revisiting Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Pathology,
Treatments, Challenges and Emerging Therapeutics Including Drug Leads from Natural Products. J. Clin. Med. 2020, 9, 1273.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Cai, Z.; Wang, S.; Li, J. Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Comprehensive Review. Front. Med. 2021, 8, 765474.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

27 of 37

15. Mo, S.; Jin, B.; Tseng, Y.; Lin, L.; Lin, L.; Shen, X.; Song, H.; Kong, M.; Luo, Z.; Chu, Y.; et al. A Precise Molecular Subtyping
of Ulcerative Colitis Reveals the Immune Heterogeneity and Predicts Clinical Drug Responses. J. Transl. Med. 2023, 21, 466.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
State, M.; Negreanu, L. Defining the Failure of Medical Therapy for Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Era of Advanced
Therapies: A Systematic Review. Biomedicines 2023, 11, 544. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16.

17. Chicco, F.; Magrì, S.; Cingolani, A.; Paduano, D.; Pesenti, M.; Zara, F.; Tumbarello, F.; Urru, E.; Melis, A.; Casula, L.; et al.

18.

Multidimensional Impact of Mediterranean Diet on IBD Patients. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2021, 27, 1–9. [CrossRef]
Sandborn, W.J.; Rebuck, R.; Wang, Y.; Zou, B.; Adedokun, O.J.; Gasink, C.; Sands, B.E.; Hanauer, S.B.; Targan, S.; Ghosh, S.; et al.
Five-Year Efficacy and Safety of Ustekinumab Treatment in Crohn’s Disease: The IM-UNITI Trial. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
2022, 20, 578–590.e4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

19. Chen, X.; Xiang, X.; Xia, W.; Li, X.; Wang, S.; Ye, S.; Tian, L.; Zhao, L.; Ai, F.; Shen, Z.; et al. Evolving Trends and Burden of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Asia, 1990–2019: A Comprehensive Analysis Based on the Global Burden of Disease Study. J.
Epidemiol. Glob. Health 2023, 13, 725–739. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

20. Cross, E.; Saunders, B.; Farmer, A.D.; Prior, J.A. Diagnostic Delay in Adult Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Systematic Review.

21.

22.

Indian J. Gastroenterol. 2023, 42, 40–52. [CrossRef]
Scheurlen, K.M.; Parks, M.A.; Macleod, A.; Galandiuk, S. Unmet Challenges in Patients with Crohn’s Disease. J. Clin. Med. 2023,
12, 5595. [CrossRef]
Sorrentino, D.; Nguyen, V.Q.; Chitnavis, M.V. Capturing the Biologic Onset of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Impact on
Translational and Clinical Science. Cells 2019, 8, 548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Agrawal, M.; Christensen, H.S.; Bøgsted, M.; Colombel, J.-F.; Jess, T.; Allin, K.H. The Rising Burden of Inflammatory Bowel
Disease in Denmark Over Two Decades: A Nationwide Cohort Study. Gastroenterology 2022, 163, 1547–1554.e5. [CrossRef]

24. Kaplan, G.G. The Global Burden of IBD: From 2015 to 2025. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2015, 12, 720–727. [CrossRef]
25. GBD Results. Available online: https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results (accessed on 26 March 2024).
26. Virta, L.J.; Saarinen, M.M.; Kolho, K.-L. Inflammatory Bowel Disease Incidence Is on the Continuous Rise Among All Paediatric
Patients Except for the Very Young: A Nationwide Registry-Based Study on 28-Year Follow-Up. J. Crohns Colitis 2017, 11, 150–156.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shah, S.C.; Khalili, H.; Gower-Rousseau, C.; Olen, O.; Benchimol, E.I.; Lynge, E.; Nielsen, K.R.; Brassard, P.; Vutcovici, M.; Bitton,
A.; et al. Sex-Based Differences in Incidence of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases—Pooled Analysis of Population-Based Studies
From Western Countries. Gastroenterology 2018, 155, 1079–1089.e3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

27.

28. Burisch, J.; Pedersen, N.; ˇCukovi´c- ˇCavka, S.; Brinar, M.; Kaimakliotis, I.; Duricova, D.; Shonová, O.; Vind, I.; Avnstrøm, S.;
Thorsgaard, N.; et al. East–West Gradient in the Incidence of Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Europe: The ECCO-EpiCom
Inception Cohort. Gut 2014, 63, 588–597. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

29. Kaplan, G.G.; Windsor, J.W. The Four Epidemiological Stages in the Global Evolution of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Nat. Rev.

Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2021, 18, 56–66. [CrossRef]

30. Mentella, M.C.; Scaldaferri, F.; Pizzoferrato, M.; Gasbarrini, A.; Miggiano, G.A.D. Nutrition, IBD and Gut Microbiota: A Review.

31.

Nutrients 2020, 12, 944. [CrossRef]
Jung, S.; Ye, B.D.; Lee, H.-S.; Baek, J.; Kim, G.; Park, D.; Park, S.H.; Yang, S.-K.; Han, B.; Liu, J.; et al. Identification of Three Novel
Susceptibility Loci for Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Koreans in an Extended Genome-Wide Association Study. J. Crohns Colitis
2021, 15, 1898–1907. [CrossRef]

32. Turpin, W.; Goethel, A.; Bedrani, L.; Croitoru, K. Determinants of IBD Heritability: Genes, Bugs, and More. Inflamm. Bowel Dis.

2018, 24, 1133–1148. [CrossRef]

33. Glassner, K.L.; Abraham, B.P.; Quigley, E.M.M. The Microbiome and Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2020,

34.

145, 16–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Saez, A.; Herrero-Fernandez, B.; Gomez-Bris, R.; Sánchez-Martinez, H.; Gonzalez-Granado, J.M. Pathophysiology of Inflammatory
Bowel Disease: Innate Immune System. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 1526. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35. Ananthakrishnan, A.N.; Bernstein, C.N.; Iliopoulos, D.; Macpherson, A.; Neurath, M.F.; Ali, R.A.R.; Vavricka, S.R.; Fiocchi, C.
Environmental Triggers in IBD: A Review of Progress and Evidence. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2018, 15, 39–49. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Jarmakiewicz-Czaja, S.; Zieli ´nska, M.; Sokal, A.; Filip, R. Genetic and Epigenetic Etiology of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: An
Update. Genes 2022, 13, 2388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36.

37. Abdul-Hussein, S.S.; Ali, E.N.; Zaki, N.H.; Ad’hiah, A.H. Genetic Polymorphism of HLA-G Gene (G*01:03, G*01:04, and G*01:05N)
in Iraqi Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease). Egypt. J. Med. Hum. Genet. 2021,
22, 34. [CrossRef]

38. Younis, N.; Zarif, R.; Mahfouz, R. Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Between Genetics and Microbiota. Mol. Biol. Rep. 2020, 47,

3053–3063. [CrossRef]

39. Chang, J.T. Pathophysiology of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 383, 2652–2664. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Guan, Q. A Comprehensive Review and Update on the Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Immunol. Res. 2019, 2019,

7247238. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

28 of 37

41.

Soderholm, A.T.; Pedicord, V.A. Intestinal Epithelial Cells: At the Interface of the Microbiota and Mucosal Immunity. Immunology
2019, 158, 267–280. [CrossRef]

42. Peterson, L.W.; Artis, D. Intestinal Epithelial Cells: Regulators of Barrier Function and Immune Homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol.

43.

2014, 14, 141–153. [CrossRef]
Foerster, E.G.; Mukherjee, T.; Cabral-Fernandes, L.; Rocha, J.D.B.; Girardin, S.E.; Philpott, D.J. How Autophagy Controls the
Intestinal Epithelial Barrier. Autophagy 2022, 18, 86–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Ananthakrishnan, A.N.; Kaplan, G.G.; Bernstein, C.N.; Burke, K.E.; Lochhead, P.J.; Sasson, A.N.; Agrawal, M.; Tiong, J.H.T.;
Steinberg, J.; Kruis, W.; et al. Lifestyle, Behaviour, and Environmental Modification for the Management of Patients with
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: An International Organization for Study of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases Consensus. Lancet
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2022, 7, 666–678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

45. Hui, K.Y.; Fernandez-Hernandez, H.; Hu, J.; Schaffner, A.; Pankratz, N.; Hsu, N.-Y.; Chuang, L.-S.; Carmi, S.; Villaverde, N.; Li, X.;
et al. Functional Variants in LRRK2 Confer Pleiotropic Effects on Risk for Crohn’s Disease and Parkinson’s Disease. Sci. Transl.
Med. 2018, 10, eaai7795. [CrossRef]

46. Carreras-Torres, R.; Ibáñez-Sanz, G.; Obón-Santacana, M.; Duell, E.J.; Moreno, V. Identifying Environmental Risk Factors for

Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: A Mendelian Randomization Study. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 19273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

47. Mirkov, M.U.; Verstockt, B.; Cleynen, I. Genetics of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Beyond NOD2. Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol.

2017, 2, 224–234. [CrossRef]

48. Ogura, Y.; Bonen, D.K.; Inohara, N.; Nicolae, D.L.; Chen, F.F.; Ramos, R.; Britton, H.; Moran, T.; Karaliuskas, R.; Duerr, R.H.; et al.
A Frameshift Mutation in NOD2 Associated with Susceptibility to Crohn’s Disease. Nature 2001, 411, 603–606. [CrossRef]
49. Ashton, J.J.; Latham, K.; Beattie, R.M.; Ennis, S. Review Article: The Genetics of the Human Leucocyte Antigen Region in

Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2019, 50, 885–900. [CrossRef]

50. Yamamoto-Furusho, J.K.; Fonseca-Camarillo, G.; Furuzawa-Carballeda, J.; Sarmiento-Aguilar, A.; Barreto-Zuñiga, R.; Martínez-
Benitez, B.; Lara-Velazquez, M.A. Caspase Recruitment Domain (CARD) Family (CARD9, CARD10, CARD11, CARD14 and
CARD15) Are Increased during Active Inflammation in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Inflamm. 2018, 15, 13.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

51. PubChem NOD2—Nucleotide Binding Oligomerization Domain Containing 2 (Human). Available online: https://pubchem.

ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/NOD2/human (accessed on 1 April 2024).

52. Chen, X.; Zhou, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Cheng, X.; Guo, X.; Yang, X. NOD2/CARD15 Gene Polymorphisms and Sarcoidosis Susceptibility:

Review and Meta-Analysis. Sarcoidosis Vasc. Diffuse Lung Dis. 2018, 35, 115–122. [CrossRef]

53. Hugot, J.-P.; Chamaillard, M.; Zouali, H.; Lesage, S.; Cézard, J.-P.; Belaiche, J.; Almer, S.; Tysk, C.; O’Morain, C.A.; Gassull, M.; et al.
Association of NOD2 Leucine-Rich Repeat Variants with Susceptibility to Crohn’s Disease. Nature 2001, 411, 599–603. [CrossRef]
54. Mann, J.K.; Shen, J.; Park, S. Enhancement of Muramyl Dipeptide-Dependent NOD2 Activity by a Self-Derived Peptide. J. Cell.

Biochem. 2017, 118, 1227–1238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

55. Liu, T.; Zhang, L.; Joo, D.; Sun, S.-C. NF-κB Signaling in Inflammation. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 2017, 2, 17023. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

56. El Hadad, J.; Schreiner, P.; Vavricka, S.R.; Greuter, T. The Genetics of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Mol. Diagn. Ther. 2024, 28,

27–35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

57. Poggi, A.; Benelli, R.; Venè, R.; Costa, D.; Ferrari, N.; Tosetti, F.; Zocchi, M.R. Human Gut-Associated Natural Killer Cells in

Health and Disease. Front. Immunol. 2019, 10, 961. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

59.

58. Zhilin, I.V.; Chashkova, E.Y.; Zhilina, A.A.; Pushkarev, B.S.; Korotaeva, N.S. The role of TNF-alpha gene (-238G/A and -308G/A)
polymorphisms in the etiology and pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases in various ethnic groups. Alm. Clin. Med. 2019,
47, 548–558. [CrossRef]
Fan, W.; Maoqing, W.; Wangyang, C.; Fulan, H.; Dandan, L.; Jiaojiao, R.; Xinshu, D.; Binbin, C.; Yashuang, Z. Relationship between
the Polymorphism of Tumor Necrosis Factor-α-308 G>A and Susceptibility to Inflammatory Bowel Diseases and Colorectal
Cancer: A Meta-Analysis. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 2011, 19, 432–437. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ferguson, L.R.; Huebner, C.; Petermann, I.; Gearry, R.B.; Barclay, M.L.; Demmers, P.; McCulloch, A.; Han, D.Y. Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism in the Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha Gene Affects Inflammatory Bowel Diseases Risk. World J. Gastroenterol. 2008,
14, 4652–4661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

60.

61. Roussomoustakaki, M.; Satsangi, J.; Welsh, K.; Louis, E.; Fanning, G.; Targan, S.; Landers, C.; Jewell, D.P. Genetic Markers May

62.

Predict Disease Behavior in Patients with Ulcerative Colitis. Gastroenterology 1997, 112, 1845–1853. [CrossRef]
van Heel, D.A.; Udalova, I.A.; De Silva, A.P.; McGovern, D.P.; Kinouchi, Y.; Hull, J.; Lench, N.J.; Cardon, L.R.; Carey, A.H.; Jewell,
D.P.; et al. Inflammatory Bowel Disease Is Associated with a TNF Polymorphism That Affects an Interaction between the OCT1
and NF(-Kappa)B Transcription Factors. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2002, 11, 1281–1289. [CrossRef]

63. Bonyadi, M.; Abdolmohammadi, R.; Jahanafrooz, Z.; Somy, M.-H.; Khoshbaten, M. TNF-Alpha Gene Polymorphisms in Iranian
Azari Turkish Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Saudi J. Gastroenterol. Off. J. Saudi Gastroenterol. Assoc. 2014, 20, 108–112.
[CrossRef]

64. Liu, J.Z.; van Sommeren, S.; Huang, H.; Ng, S.C.; Alberts, R.; Takahashi, A.; Ripke, S.; Lee, J.C.; Jostins, L.; Shah, T.; et al.
Association Analyses Identify 38 Susceptibility Loci for Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Highlight Shared Genetic Risk across
Populations. Nat. Genet. 2015, 47, 979–986. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

29 of 37

66.

65. Kakuta, Y.; Kawai, Y.; Naito, T.; Hirano, A.; Umeno, J.; Fuyuno, Y.; Liu, Z.; Li, D.; Nakano, T.; Izumiyama, Y.; et al. A Genome-Wide
Association Study Identifying RAP1A as a Novel Susceptibility Gene for Crohn’s Disease in Japanese Individuals. J. Crohns Colitis
2019, 13, 648–658. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Souza, R.F.; Caetano, M.A.F.; Magalhães, H.I.R.; Castelucci, P. Study of Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor in the Inflammatory
Bowel Disease. World J. Gastroenterol. 2023, 29, 2733–2746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
van Loo, G.; Bertrand, M.J.M. Death by TNF: A Road to Inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2023, 23, 289–303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jang, D.-I.; Lee, A.-H.; Shin, H.-Y.; Song, H.-R.; Park, J.-H.; Kang, T.-B.; Lee, S.-R.; Yang, S.-H. The Role of Tumor Necrosis Factor
Alpha (TNF-α) in Autoimmune Disease and Current TNF-α Inhibitors in Therapeutics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 2719. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

67.
68.

69. Wilson, A.; Jansen, L.E.; Rose, R.V.; Gregor, J.C.; Ponich, T.; Chande, N.; Khanna, R.; Yan, B.; Jairath, V.; Khanna, N.; et al.
HLA-DQA1-HLA-DRB1 Polymorphism Is a Major Predictor of Azathioprine-Induced Pancreatitis in Patients with Inflammatory
Bowel Disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2018, 47, 615–620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

70. Degenhardt, F.; Mayr, G.; Wendorff, M.; Boucher, G.; Ellinghaus, E.; Ellinghaus, D.; ElAbd, H.; Rosati, E.; Hübenthal, M.; Juzenas,
S.; et al. Transethnic Analysis of the Human Leukocyte Antigen Region for Ulcerative Colitis Reveals Not Only Shared but Also
Ethnicity-Specific Disease Associations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2021, 30, 356–369. [CrossRef]

71. Abdul-Hussein, S.S.; Ali, E.N.; Alkhalidi, N.M.F.; Zaki, N.H.; Ad’hiah, A.H. Susceptibility Role of Soluble HLA-G and HLA-G
14-Bp Insertion/Deletion Polymorphism in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Egypt. J. Med. Hum. Genet. 2020, 21, 68. [CrossRef]
72. Bergstein, S.; Spencer, E.A. DOP72 HLA-DQA1*05 Associates with Immunogenicity and Loss of Response to Anti-TNF Therapy

73.

in the IBD Population: A Meta-Analysis. J. Crohns Colitis 2023, 17, i148–i150. [CrossRef]
IBD Related Genes—GeneCards. Available online: https://www.genecards.org/Search/Keyword?queryString=IBD&
geneCategories=GeneticLocus&startPage=0 (accessed on 3 April 2024).

74. Gene—NCBI. Available online: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/?term=ibd (accessed on 3 April 2024).
75.

Jeyakumar, T.; Fodil, N.; Van Der Kraak, L.; Meunier, C.; Cayrol, R.; McGregor, K.; Langlais, D.; Greenwood, C.M.T.; Beauchemin,
N.; Gros, P. Inactivation of Interferon Regulatory Factor 1 Causes Susceptibility to Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer. Sci. Rep.
2019, 9, 18897. [CrossRef]
Ferraris, A.; Torres, B.; Knafelz, D.; Barabino, A.; Lionetti, P.; de Angelis, G.L.; Iacono, G.; Papadatou, B.; D’Amato, G.; Di Ciommo,
V.; et al. Relationship between CARD15, SLC22A4/5, and DLG5 Polymorphisms and Early-Onset Inflammatory Bowel Diseases:
An Italian Multicentric Study. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2006, 12, 355–361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sebastian-delaCruz, M.; Olazagoitia-Garmendia, A.; Gonzalez-Moro, I.; Santin, I.; Garcia-Etxebarria, K.; Castellanos-Rubio, A.
Implication of m6A mRNA Methylation in Susceptibility to Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Epigenomes 2020, 4, 16. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

76.

77.

78. Liu, M.; Yuan, W.; Park, S. Association between IL-10 Rs3024505 and Susceptibility to Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Systematic

Review and Meta-Analysis. Cytokine 2022, 149, 155721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

79. Zhu, L.; Shi, T.; Zhong, C.; Wang, Y.; Chang, M.; Liu, X. IL-10 and IL-10 Receptor Mutations in Very Early Onset Inflammatory

Bowel Disease. Gastroenterol. Res. 2017, 10, 65–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

80. Michail, S.; Bultron, G.; DePaolo, R.W. Genetic Variants Associated with Crohn’s Disease. Appl. Clin. Genet. 2013, 6, 25–32.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

81. Chen, S.-L.; Li, C.-M.; Li, W.; Liu, Q.-S.; Hu, S.-Y.; Zhao, M.-Y.; Hu, D.-S.; Hao, Y.-W.; Zeng, J.-H.; Zhang, Y. How Autophagy, a
Potential Therapeutic Target, Regulates Intestinal Inflammation. Front. Immunol. 2023, 14, 1087677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sivanesan, D.; Beauchamp, C.; Quinou, C.; Lee, J.; Lesage, S.; Chemtob, S.; Rioux, J.D.; Michnick, S.W. IL23R (Interleukin 23
Receptor) Variants Protective against Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IBD) Display Loss of Function Due to Impaired Protein
Stability and Intracellular Trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 2016, 291, 8673–8685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

82.

83. Chen, J.; Ruan, X.; Sun, Y.; Lu, S.; Hu, S.; Yuan, S.; Li, X. Multi-Omic Insight into the Molecular Networks of Mitochondrial

Dysfunction in the Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. eBioMedicine 2023, 99, 104934. [CrossRef]

84. Xu, Y.; Shen, J.; Ran, Z. Emerging Views of Mitophagy in Immunity and Autoimmune Diseases. Autophagy 2019, 16, 3–17.

[CrossRef]

85. Hirose, M.; Sekar, P.; Eladham, M.W.A.; Albataineh, M.T.; Rahmani, M.; Ibrahim, S.M. Interaction between Mitochondria and
Microbiota Modulating Cellular Metabolism in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Mol. Med. 2023, 101, 1513–1526. [CrossRef]
86. Li, P.; Wang, Y.; Luo, J.; Zeng, Q.; Wang, M.; Bai, M.; Zhou, H.; Wang, J.; Jiang, H. Downregulation of OCTN2 by Cytokines Plays
an Important Role in the Progression of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2020, 178, 114115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Cader, M.Z.; de Almeida Rodrigues, R.P.; West, J.A.; Sewell, G.W.; Md-Ibrahim, M.N.; Reikine, S.; Sirago, G.; Unger, L.W.;
Inglesias-Romero, A.B.; Ramshorn, K.; et al. FAMIN Is a Multifunctional Purine Enzyme Enabling the Purine Nucleotide Cycle.
Cell 2020, 180, 278–295.e23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

88. Xu, S.; Li, X.; Zhang, S.; Qi, C.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, R.; Xiang, L.; Chen, L.; Zhu, Y.; Tang, C.; et al. Oxidative Stress Gene Expression,
DNA Methylation, and Gut Microbiota Interaction Trigger Crohn’s Disease: A Multi-Omics Mendelian Randomization Study.
BMC Med. 2023, 21, 179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

89. Chen, J.; Xu, F.; Ruan, X.; Sun, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Zhao, J.; Zheng, J.; Larsson, S.C.; Wang, X.; et al. Therapeutic Targets for
Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Proteome-Wide Mendelian Randomization and Colocalization Analyses. EBioMedicine 2023, 89,
104494. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

30 of 37

90. Weimers, P.; Halfvarson, J.; Sachs, M.C.; Saunders-Pullman, R.; Ludvigsson, J.F.; Peter, I.; Burisch, J.; Olén, O. Inflammatory
Bowel Disease and Parkinson’s Disease: A Nationwide Swedish Cohort Study. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2019, 25, 111–123. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

91. Domínguez-Fernández, C.; Egiguren-Ortiz, J.; Razquin, J.; Gómez-Galán, M.; De las Heras-García, L.; Paredes-Rodríguez, E.;
Astigarraga, E.; Miguélez, C.; Barreda-Gómez, G. Review of Technological Challenges in Personalised Medicine and Early
Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Disorders. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 3321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

92. Pap, D.; Veres-Székely, A.; Szebeni, B.; Vannay, Á. PARK7/DJ-1 as a Therapeutic Target in Gut-Brain Axis Diseases. Int. J. Mol. Sci.

2022, 23, 6626. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

93. Lippai, R.; Veres-Székely, A.; Sziksz, E.; Iwakura, Y.; Pap, D.; Rokonay, R.; Szebeni, B.; Lotz, G.; Béres, N.J.; Cseh, Á.; et al.

Immunomodulatory Role of Parkinson’s Disease 7 in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 14582. [CrossRef]

94. Wallings, R.L.; Tansey, M.G. LRRK2 Regulation of Immune-Pathways and Inflammatory Disease. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2019, 47,

1581–1595. [CrossRef]

95. GeneCards—Human Genes|Gene Database|Gene Search. Available online: https://www.genecards.org/ (accessed on 15

96.

June 2024).
Follin-Arbelet, B.; Cvancarova Småstuen, M.; Hovde, Ø.; Jelsness-Jørgensen, L.-P.; Moum, B. Mortality in Patients with Inflamma-
tory Bowel Disease: Results from 30 Years of Follow-up in a Norwegian Inception Cohort (the IBSEN Study). J. Crohns Colitis
2022, 17, 497–503. [CrossRef]

97. McComb, S.; Thiriot, A.; Akache, B.; Krishnan, L.; Stark, F. Introduction to the Immune System. In Immunoproteomics: Methods and

Protocols; Fulton, K.M., Twine, S.M., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 1–24. ISBN 978-1-4939-9597-4.

98. Hernandez-Suarez, L.; Diez-Martin, E.; Egiguren-Ortiz, J.; Fernandez, R.; Etxebarria, A.; Astigarraga, E.; Miguelez, C.; Ramirez-
Garcia, A.; Barreda-Gómez, G. Serological Antibodies against Kidney, Liver, and Spleen Membrane Antigens as Potential
Biomarkers in Patients with Immune Disorders. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 2025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

99. Boden, E.K.; Snapper, S.B. Regulatory T Cells in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 2008, 24, 733–741.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

100. IQWiG. How Does the Immune System Work? In InformedHealth.org [Internet]; Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care

(IQWiG): Köln, Germany, 2020.

101. Marshall, J.S.; Warrington, R.; Watson, W.; Kim, H.L. An Introduction to Immunology and Immunopathology. Allergy Asthma

Clin. Immunol. Off. J. Can. Soc. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2018, 14, 49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

102. IQWiG. The Innate and Adaptive Immune Systems. In InformedHealth.org [Internet]; Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health

Care (IQWiG): Köln, Germany, 2020.

103. Hegazy, A.N.; West, N.R.; Stubbington, M.J.T.; Wendt, E.; Suijker, K.I.M.; Datsi, A.; This, S.; Danne, C.; Campion, S.; Duncan,
S.H.; et al. Circulating and Tissue-Resident CD4+ T Cells With Reactivity to Intestinal Microbiota Are Abundant in Healthy
Individuals and Function Is Altered During Inflammation. Gastroenterology 2017, 153, 1320–1337.e16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Zheng, D.; Liwinski, T.; Elinav, E. Interaction between Microbiota and Immunity in Health and Disease. Cell Res. 2020, 30, 492–506.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

105. Belkaid, Y.; Hand, T. Role of the Microbiota in Immunity and Inflammation. Cell 2014, 157, 121–141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Chen, Y.; Cui, W.; Li, X.; Yang, H. Interaction Between Commensal Bacteria, Immune Response and the Intestinal Barrier in

Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Immunol. 2021, 12, 761981. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

107. Shao, B.-Z.; Yao, Y.; Zhai, J.-S.; Zhu, J.-H.; Li, J.-P.; Wu, K. The Role of Autophagy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Physiol.

2021, 12, 621132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

108. Serigado, J.M.; Foulke-Abel, J.; Hines, W.C.; Hanson, J.A.; In, J.; Kovbasnjuk, O. Ulcerative Colitis: Novel Epithelial Insights

Provided by Single Cell RNA Sequencing. Front. Med. 2022, 9, 868508. [CrossRef]

109. Yang, Z.-J.; Wang, B.-Y.; Wang, T.-T.; Wang, F.-F.; Guo, Y.-X.; Hua, R.-X.; Shang, H.-W.; Lu, X.; Xu, J.-D. Functions of Dendritic

Cells and Its Association with Intestinal Diseases. Cells 2021, 10, 583. [CrossRef]

110. Aggeletopoulou, I.; Kalafateli, M.; Tsounis, E.P.; Triantos, C. Exploring the Role of IL-1β in Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Pathogenesis. Front. Med. 2024, 11, 1307394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

111. de Mattos, B.R.R.; Garcia, M.P.G.; Nogueira, J.B.; Paiatto, L.N.; Albuquerque, C.G.; Souza, C.L.; Fernandes, L.G.R.; Tamashiro,
W.M.d.S.C.; Simioni, P.U. Inflammatory Bowel Disease: An Overview of Immune Mechanisms and Biological Treatments.
Mediators Inflamm. 2015, 2015, 493012. [CrossRef]

112. Sun, D.; Li, C.; Chen, S.; Zhang, X. Emerging Role of Dendritic Cell Intervention in the Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

BioMed Res. Int. 2022, 2022, 7025634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

113. Vyas, S.P.; Goswami, R. A Decade of Th9 Cells: Role of Th9 Cells in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Immunol. 2018, 9, 1139.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

114. Wieber, K.; Zimmer, C.L.; Hertl, M. Detection of Autoreactive CD4+ T Cells by MHC Class II Multimers in HLA-Linked Human

Autoimmune Diseases. J. Clin. Investig. 2021, 131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

115. Russ, B.E.; Prier, J.E.; Rao, S.; Turner, S.J. T Cell Immunity as a Tool for Studying Epigenetic Regulation of Cellular Differentiation.

Front. Genet. 2013, 4, 218. [CrossRef]

116. Hamilton, M.J.; Snapper, S.B.; Blumberg, R.S. Update on Biologic Pathways in Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Their Therapeutic

Relevance. J. Gastroenterol. 2012, 47, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

31 of 37

117. Keppler, S.J.; Goess, M.C.; Heinze, J.M. The Wanderings of Gut-Derived IgA Plasma Cells: Impact on Systemic Immune Responses.

Front. Immunol. 2021, 12, 670290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

118. Castro-Dopico, T.; Clatworthy, M.R. Mucosal IgG in Inflammatory Bowel Disease—A Question of (Sub)Class? Gut Microbes 2020,

12, 1651596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

119. Sterling, K.G.; Dodd, G.K.; Alhamdi, S.; Asimenios, P.G.; Dagda, R.K.; De Meirleir, K.L.; Hudig, D.; Lombardi, V.C. Mucosal

Immunity and the Gut-Microbiota-Brain-Axis in Neuroimmune Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 13328. [CrossRef]

120. Zogorean, R.; Wirtz, S. The Yin and Yang of B Cells in a Constant State of Battle: Intestinal Inflammation and Inflammatory Bowel

Disease. Front. Immunol. 2023, 14, 1260266. [CrossRef]

121. Shapiro, J.M.; de Zoete, M.R.; Palm, N.W.; Laenen, Y.; Bright, R.; Mallette, M.; Bu, K.; Bielecka, A.A.; Xu, F.; Hurtado-Lorenzo, A.;
et al. Immunoglobulin A Targets a Unique Subset of the Microbiota in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Cell Host Microbe 2021, 29,
83–93.e3. [CrossRef]

122. Lin, R.; Chen, H.; Shu, W.; Sun, M.; Fang, L.; Shi, Y.; Pang, Z.; Wu, W.; Liu, Z. Clinical Significance of Soluble Immunoglobulins A
and G and Their Coated Bacteria in Feces of Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Transl. Med. 2018, 16, 359. [CrossRef]
123. Castro-Dopico, T.; Clatworthy, M.R. IgG and Fcγ Receptors in Intestinal Immunity and Inflammation. Front. Immunol. 2019,

10, 805. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

124. Zeng, M.Y.; Cisalpino, D.; Varadarajan, S.; Hellman, J.; Warren, H.S.; Cascalho, M.; Inohara, N.; Núñez, G. Gut Microbiota-Induced
Immunoglobulin G Controls Systemic Infection by Symbiotic Bacteria and Pathogens. Immunity 2016, 44, 647–658. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

125. Bourgonje, A.R.; Roo-Brand, G.; Lisotto, P.; Sadaghian Sadabad, M.; Reitsema, R.D.; de Goffau, M.C.; Faber, K.N.; Dijkstra, G.;
Harmsen, H.J.M. Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Disease Show IgG Immune Responses Towards Specific Intestinal Bacterial
Genera. Front. Immunol. 2022, 13, 842911. [CrossRef]

126. Chen, H.H.; Simmons, A. Becalming Type 17 Inflammation in Ulcerative Colitis. Immunity 2019, 50, 1029–1031. [CrossRef]
127. Castro-Dopico, T.; Dennison, T.W.; Ferdinand, J.R.; Mathews, R.J.; Fleming, A.; Clift, D.; Stewart, B.J.; Jing, C.; Strongili, K.; Labzin,
L.I.; et al. Anti-Commensal IgG Drives Intestinal Inflammation and Type 17 Immunity in Ulcerative Colitis. Immunity 2019, 50,
1099–1114.e10. [CrossRef]

128. Xiao, N.; Liu, F.; Zhou, G.; Sun, M.; Ai, F.; Liu, Z. Food-Specific IgGs Are Highly Increased in the Sera of Patients with Inflammatory

Bowel Disease and Are Clinically Relevant to the Pathogenesis. Intern. Med. 2018, 57, 2787–2798. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

129. Kazemi-Shirazi, L.; Gasche, C.H.; Natter, S.; Gangl, A.; Smolen, J.; SPITZAUER, S.; VALENT, P.; KRAFT, D.; VALENTA, R. IgA
Autoreactivity: A Feature Common to Inflammatory Bowel and Connective Tissue Diseases. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2002, 128,
102–109. [CrossRef]

130. Kho, Z.Y.; Lal, S.K. The Human Gut Microbiome—A Potential Controller of Wellness and Disease. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9,

356589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

131. Nogal, A.; Valdes, A.M.; Menni, C. The Role of Short-Chain Fatty Acids in the Interplay between Gut Microbiota and Diet in

Cardio-Metabolic Health. Gut Microbes 2021, 13, 1897212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

132. Gu, Y.; Zhou, G.; Qin, X.; Huang, S.; Wang, B.; Cao, H. The Potential Role of Gut Mycobiome in Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Front.

Microbiol. 2019, 10, 458003. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

133. Houshyar, Y.; Massimino, L.; Lamparelli, L.A.; Danese, S.; Ungaro, F. Going Beyond Bacteria: Uncovering the Role of Archaeome

and Mycobiome in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Physiol. 2021, 12, 783295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

134. Duncan, S.H.; Conti, E.; Ricci, L.; Walker, A.W. Links between Diet, Intestinal Anaerobes, Microbial Metabolites and Health.

Biomedicines 2023, 11, 1338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

135. Jansen, D.; Matthijnssens, J. The Emerging Role of the Gut Virome in Health and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Challenges,

Covariates and a Viral Imbalance. Viruses 2023, 15, 173. [CrossRef]

136. Dubik, M.; Pilecki, B.; Moeller, J.B. Commensal Intestinal Protozoa—Underestimated Members of the Gut Microbial Community.

Biology 2022, 11, 1742. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

137. Gouba, N.; Hien, Y.E.; Guissou, M.L.; Fonkou, M.D.M.; Traoré, Y.; Tarnagda, Z. Digestive Tract Mycobiota and Microbiota and the

Effects on the Immune System. Hum. Microbiome J. 2019, 12, 100056. [CrossRef]

138. Anjana; Tiwari, S.K. Bacteriocin-Producing Probiotic Lactic Acid Bacteria in Controlling Dysbiosis of the Gut Microbiota. Front.

Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2022, 12, 851140. [CrossRef]

139. Yoo, J.Y.; Groer, M.; Dutra, S.V.O.; Sarkar, A.; McSkimming, D.I. Gut Microbiota and Immune System Interactions. Microorganisms

2020, 8, 1587. [CrossRef]

140. Corrêa-Oliveira, R.; Fachi, J.L.; Vieira, A.; Sato, F.T.; Vinolo, M.A.R. Regulation of Immune Cell Function by Short-Chain Fatty

Acids. Clin. Transl. Immunol. 2016, 5, e73. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

141. Konjar, Š.; Pavšiˇc, M.; Veldhoen, M. Regulation of Oxygen Homeostasis at the Intestinal Epithelial Barrier Site. Int. J. Mol. Sci.

2021, 22, 9170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

142. Clinton, N.A.; Hameed, S.A.; Agyei, E.K.; Jacob, J.C.; Oyebanji, V.O.; Jabea, C.E. Crosstalk between the Intestinal Virome and
Other Components of the Microbiota, and Its Effect on Intestinal Mucosal Response and Diseases. J. Immunol. Res. 2022, 2022,
e7883945. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

143. Shan, Y.; Lee, M.; Chang, E.B. The Gut Microbiome and Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Annu. Rev. Med. 2022, 73, 455. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

32 of 37

144. Khosravi, A.; Mazmanian, S.K. Disruption of the Gut Microbiome as a Risk Factor for Microbial Infections. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.

2013, 16, 221–227. [CrossRef]

145. Gonçalves, P.; Araújo, J.R.; Di Santo, J.P. A Cross-Talk Between Microbiota-Derived Short-Chain Fatty Acids and the Host Mucosal
Immune System Regulates Intestinal Homeostasis and Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2018, 24, 558–572.
[CrossRef]

146. Roy, S.; Dhaneshwar, S. Role of Prebiotics, Probiotics, and Synbiotics in Management of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Current

Perspectives. World J. Gastroenterol. 2023, 29, 2078–2100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

147. Perez, R.H.; Zendo, T.; Sonomoto, K. Multiple Bacteriocin Production in Lactic Acid Bacteria. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2022, 134, 277–287.

[CrossRef]

148. Darbandi, A.; Asadi, A.; Mahdizade Ari, M.; Ohadi, E.; Talebi, M.; Halaj Zadeh, M.; Darb Emamie, A.; Ghanavati, R.; Kakanj, M.

Bacteriocins: Properties and Potential Use as Antimicrobials. J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 2022, 36, e24093. [CrossRef]

149. Nabavi-Rad, A.; Sadeghi, A.; Asadzadeh Aghdaei, H.; Yadegar, A.; Smith, S.M.; Zali, M.R. The Double-Edged Sword of Probiotic

Supplementation on Gut Microbiota Structure in Helicobacter Pylori Management. Gut Microbes 2022, 14, 2108655. [CrossRef]

150. Redanz, S.; Cheng, X.; Giacaman, R.A.; Pfeifer, C.S.; Merritt, J.; Kreth, J. Live and Let Die: Hydrogen Peroxide Production by the
Commensal Flora and Its Role in Maintaining a Symbiotic Microbiome. Mol. Oral Microbiol. 2018, 33, 337–352. [CrossRef]
151. Caenepeel, C.; Sadat Seyed Tabib, N.; Vieira-Silva, S.; Vermeire, S. Review Article: How the Intestinal Microbiota May Reflect
Disease Activity and Influence Therapeutic Outcome in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2020, 52,
1453–1468. [CrossRef]

152. Dong, L.-N.; Wang, M.; Guo, J.; Wang, J.-P. Role of Intestinal Microbiota and Metabolites in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Chin.

Med. J. 2019, 132, 1610. [CrossRef]

153. Ananthakrishnan, A.N. Microbiome-Based Biomarkers for IBD. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2020, 26, 1463–1469. [CrossRef]
154. Zhou, Y.; Xu, Z.Z.; He, Y.; Yang, Y.; Liu, L.; Lin, Q.; Nie, Y.; Li, M.; Zhi, F.; Liu, S.; et al. Gut Microbiota Offers Universal Biomarkers
across Ethnicity in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Diagnosis and Infliximab Response Prediction. mSystems 2018, 3, e00188-17.
[CrossRef]

155. Zhou, Y.; Zhi, F. Lower Level of Bacteroides in the Gut Microbiota Is Associated with Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Meta-

Analysis. BioMed Res. Int. 2016, 2016, 5828959. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

156. Steed, H.; Macfarlane, G.T.; Blackett, K.L.; Bahrami, B.; Reynolds, N.; Walsh, S.V.; Cummings, J.H.; Macfarlane, S. Clinical Trial:
The Microbiological and Immunological Effects of Synbiotic Consumption—A Randomized Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled
Study in Active Crohn’s Disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2010, 32, 872–883. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

157. Doherty, M.K.; Ding, T.; Koumpouras, C.; Telesco, S.E.; Monast, C.; Das, A.; Brodmerkel, C.; Schloss, P.D. Fecal Microbiota
Signatures Are Associated with Response to Ustekinumab Therapy among Crohn’s Disease Patients. mBio 2018, 9, e02120-17.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

158. Guo, X.; Huang, C.; Xu, J.; Xu, H.; Liu, L.; Zhao, H.; Wang, J.; Huang, W.; Peng, W.; Chen, Y.; et al. Gut Microbiota Is a Potential

Biomarker in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Nutr. 2022, 8, 818902. [CrossRef]

159. Takahashi, K.; Nishida, A.; Fujimoto, T.; Fujii, M.; Shioya, M.; Imaeda, H.; Inatomi, O.; Bamba, S.; Sugimoto, M.; Andoh, A.
Reduced Abundance of Butyrate-Producing Bacteria Species in the Fecal Microbial Community in Crohn’s Disease. Digestion
2016, 93, 59–65. [CrossRef]

160. Yu, Y.; Yang, W.; Li, Y.; Cong, Y. Enteroendocrine Cells: Sensing Gut Microbiota and Regulating Inflammatory Bowel Diseases.

Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2020, 26, 11–20. [CrossRef]

161. Palmela, C.; Chevarin, C.; Xu, Z.; Torres, J.; Sevrin, G.; Hirten, R.; Barnich, N.; Ng, S.C.; Colombel, J.-F. Adherent-Invasive

Escherichia Coli in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Gut 2018, 67, 574–587. [CrossRef]

162. Liu, F.; Ma, R.; Tay, C.Y.A.; Octavia, S.; Lan, R.; Chung, H.K.L.; Riordan, S.M.; Grimm, M.C.; Leong, R.W.; Tanaka, M.M.; et al.
Genomic Analysis of Oral Campylobacter Concisus Strains Identified a Potential Bacterial Molecular Marker Associated with
Active Crohn’s Disease. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2018, 7, 64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

163. Loubinoux, J.; Bronowicki, J.-P.; Pereira, I.A.C.; Mougenel, J.-L.; Faou, A.E. Sulfate-Reducing Bacteria in Human Feces and Their

Association with Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2002, 40, 107–112. [CrossRef]
164. Neil, J.A.; Cadwell, K. The Intestinal Virome and Immunity. J. Immunol. 2018, 201, 1615–1624. [CrossRef]
165. Cao, Z.; Sugimura, N.; Burgermeister, E.; Ebert, M.P.; Zuo, T.; Lan, P. The Gut Virome: A New Microbiome Component in Health

and Disease. eBioMedicine 2022, 81. [CrossRef]

166. Tiamani, K.; Luo, S.; Schulz, S.; Xue, J.; Costa, R.; Khan Mirzaei, M.; Deng, L. The Role of Virome in the Gastrointestinal Tract and

Beyond. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2022, 46, fuac027. [CrossRef]

167. Shuwen, H.; Kefeng, D. Intestinal Phages Interact with Bacteria and Are Involved in Human Diseases. Gut Microbes 2022, 14,

2113717. [CrossRef]

168. Freer, G.; Maggi, F.; Pifferi, M.; Di Cicco, M.E.; Peroni, D.G.; Pistello, M. The Virome and Its Major Component, Anellovirus, a
Convoluted System Molding Human Immune Defenses and Possibly Affecting the Development of Asthma and Respiratory
Diseases in Childhood. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 686. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

169. Brown, E.M.; Arellano-Santoyo, H.; Temple, E.R.; Costliow, Z.A.; Pichaud, M.; Hall, A.B.; Liu, K.; Durney, M.A.; Gu, X.; Plichta,
D.R.; et al. Gut Microbiome ADP-Ribosyltransferases Are Widespread Phage-Encoded Fitness Factors. Cell Host Microbe 2021, 29,
1351–1365.e11. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

33 of 37

170. Jahn, M.T.; Arkhipova, K.; Markert, S.M.; Stigloher, C.; Lachnit, T.; Pita, L.; Kupczok, A.; Ribes, M.; Stengel, S.T.; Rosenstiel, P.;
et al. A Phage Protein Aids Bacterial Symbionts in Eukaryote Immune Evasion. Cell Host Microbe 2019, 26, 542–550.e5. [CrossRef]

171. Aktories, K.; Schwan, C.; Jank, T. Clostridium Difficile Toxin Biology. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2017, 71, 281–307. [CrossRef]
172. Richard, M.L.; Sokol, H. The Gut Mycobiota: Insights into Analysis, Environmental Interactions and Role in Gastrointestinal

Diseases. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2019, 16, 331–345. [CrossRef]

173. Gutierrez, M.W.; Arrieta, M.-C. The Intestinal Mycobiome as a Determinant of Host Immune and Metabolic Health. Curr. Opin.

Microbiol. 2021, 62, 8–13. [CrossRef]

174. Sokol, H.; Leducq, V.; Aschard, H.; Pham, H.-P.; Jegou, S.; Landman, C.; Cohen, D.; Liguori, G.; Bourrier, A.; Nion-Larmurier, I.;

et al. Original Article: Fungal Microbiota Dysbiosis in IBD. Gut 2017, 66, 1039. [CrossRef]

175. Beheshti-Maal, A.; Shahrokh, S.; Ansari, S.; Mirsamadi, E.S.; Yadegar, A.; Mirjalali, H.; Zali, M.R. Gut Mycobiome: The Probable

Determinative Role of Fungi in IBD Patients. Mycoses 2021, 64, 468–476. [CrossRef]

176. Mahmoudi, E.; Mozhgani, S.-H.; Sharifinejad, N. The Role of Mycobiota-Genotype Association in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases:

A Narrative Review. Gut Pathog. 2021, 13, 31. [CrossRef]

177. Deng, L.; Wojciech, L.; Gascoigne, N.R.J.; Peng, G.; Tan, K.S.W. New Insights into the Interactions between Blastocystis, the Gut

Microbiota, and Host Immunity. PLoS Pathog. 2021, 17, e1009253. [CrossRef]

178. Petersen, A.M.; Stensvold, C.R.; Mirsepasi, H.; Engberg, J.; Friis-Møller, A.; Porsbo, L.J.; Hammerum, A.M.; Nordgaard-Lassen, I.;
Nielsen, H.V.; Krogfelt, K.A. Active Ulcerative Colitis Associated with Low Prevalence of Blastocystis and Dientamoeba Fragilis
Infection. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 2013, 48, 638–639. [CrossRef]

179. Rossen, N.G.; Bart, A.; Verhaar, N.; van Nood, E.; Kootte, R.; de Groot, P.F.; D’Haens, G.R.; Ponsioen, C.Y.; van Gool, T. Low
Prevalence of Blastocystis Sp. in Active Ulcerative Colitis Patients. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2015, 34, 1039–1044.
[CrossRef]

180. Mafra, D.; Ribeiro, M.; Fonseca, L.; Regis, B.; Cardozo, L.F.M.F.; Fragoso dos Santos, H.; Emiliano de Jesus, H.; Schultz, J.; Shiels,
P.G.; Stenvinkel, P.; et al. Archaea from the Gut Microbiota of Humans: Could Be Linked to Chronic Diseases? Anaerobe 2022, 77,
102629. [CrossRef]

181. Candeliere, F.; Sola, L.; Raimondi, S.; Rossi, M.; Amaretti, A. Good and Bad Dispositions between Archaea and Bacteria in the
Human Gut: New Insights from Metagenomic Survey and Co-Occurrence Analysis. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 2024, 9, 88–98.
[CrossRef]

182. Kim, J.Y.; Whon, T.W.; Lim, M.Y.; Kim, Y.B.; Kim, N.; Kwon, M.-S.; Kim, J.; Lee, S.H.; Choi, H.-J.; Nam, I.-H.; et al. The Human Gut

Archaeome: Identification of Diverse Haloarchaea in Korean Subjects. Microbiome 2020, 8, 114. [CrossRef]

183. Foppa, C.; Rizkala, T.; Repici, A.; Hassan, C.; Spinelli, A. Microbiota and IBD: Current Knowledge and Future Perspectives. Dig.

Liver Dis. 2024, 56, 911–922. [CrossRef]

184. Fassarella, M.; Blaak, E.E.; Penders, J.; Nauta, A.; Smidt, H.; Zoetendal, E.G. Gut Microbiome Stability and Resilience: Elucidating

the Response to Perturbations in Order to Modulate Gut Health. Gut 2021, 70, 595–605. [CrossRef]

185. Round, J.L.; Palm, N.W. Causal Effects of the Microbiota on Immune-Mediated Diseases. Sci. Immunol. 2018, 3, eaao1603.

[CrossRef]

186. Walter, J.; Armet, A.M.; Finlay, B.B.; Shanahan, F. Establishing or Exaggerating Causality for the Gut Microbiome: Lessons from

Human Microbiota-Associated Rodents. Cell 2020, 180, 221–232. [CrossRef]

187. Al Radi, Z.M.A.; Prins, F.M.; Collij, V.; Vich Vila, A.; Festen, E.A.M.; Dijkstra, G.; Weersma, R.K.; Klaassen, M.A.Y.; Gacesa, R.
Exploring the Predictive Value of Gut Microbiome Signatures for Therapy Intensification in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel
Disease: A 10-Year Follow-up Study. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2024, izae064. [CrossRef]

188. Tiffon, C. The Impact of Nutrition and Environmental Epigenetics on Human Health and Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 3425.

[CrossRef]

189. van der Sloot, K.W.J.; Weersma, R.K.; Alizadeh, B.Z.; Dijkstra, G. Identification of Environmental Risk Factors Associated With

the Development of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Crohns Colitis 2020, 14, 1662–1671. [CrossRef]

190. Singh, N.; Bernstein, C.N. Environmental Risk Factors for Inflammatory Bowel Disease. United Eur. Gastroenterol. J. 2022, 10,

1047–1053. [CrossRef]

191. Ho, S.-M.; Lewis, J.D.; Mayer, E.A.; Bernstein, C.N.; Plevy, S.E.; Chuang, E.; Rappaport, S.M.; Croitoru, K.; Korzenik, J.R.; Krischer,

J.; et al. Challenges in IBD Research: Environmental Triggers. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2019, 25, S13–S23. [CrossRef]

192. Berkowitz, L.; Schultz, B.M.; Salazar, G.A.; Pardo-Roa, C.; Sebastián, V.P.; Álvarez-Lobos, M.M.; Bueno, S.M. Impact of Cigarette
Smoking on the Gastrointestinal Tract Inflammation: Opposing Effects in Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis. Front. Immunol.
2018, 9, 325253. [CrossRef]

193. Piovani, D.; Danese, S.; Peyrin-Biroulet, L.; Nikolopoulos, G.K.; Lytras, T.; Bonovas, S. Environmental Risk Factors for Inflamma-

tory Bowel Diseases: An Umbrella Review of Meta-Analyses. Gastroenterology 2019, 157, 647–659.e4. [CrossRef]

194. Lee, S.H.; Yun, Y.; Kim, S.J.; Lee, E.-J.; Chang, Y.; Ryu, S.; Shin, H.; Kim, H.-L.; Kim, H.-N.; Lee, J.H. Association between
Cigarette Smoking Status and Composition of Gut Microbiota: Population-Based Cross-Sectional Study. J. Clin. Med. 2018, 7, 282.
[CrossRef]

195. Khalili, H.; Chan, S.S.M.; Lochhead, P.; Ananthakrishnan, A.N.; Hart, A.R.; Chan, A.T. The Role of Diet in the Aetiopathogenesis

of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2018, 15, 525–535. [CrossRef]

196. Sugihara, K.; Kamada, N. Diet–Microbiota Interactions in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Nutrients 2021, 13, 1533. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

34 of 37

197. Gomaa, E.Z. Human Gut Microbiota/Microbiome in Health and Diseases: A Review. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 2020, 113,

2019–2040. [CrossRef]

198. Hirai, F.; Takeda, T.; Takada, Y.; Kishi, M.; Beppu, T.; Takatsu, N.; Miyaoka, M.; Hisabe, T.; Yao, K.; Ueki, T. Efficacy of Enteral
Nutrition in Patients with Crohn’s Disease on Maintenance Anti-TNF-Alpha Antibody Therapy: A Meta-Analysis. J. Gastroenterol.
2020, 55, 133–141. [CrossRef]

199. Abdalla, S.; Benoist, S.; Maggiori, L.; Zerbib, P.; Lefevre, J.H.; Denost, Q.; Germain, A.; Cotte, E.; Beyer-Berjot, L.; Corte, H.; et al.
Impact of Preoperative Enteral Nutritional Support on Postoperative Outcome in Patients with Crohn’s Disease Complicated by
Malnutrition: Results of a Subgroup Analysis of the Nationwide Cohort Registry from the GETAID Chirurgie Group. Colorectal
Dis. 2021, 23, 1451–1462. [CrossRef]

200. Meade, S.; Patel, K.V.; Luber, R.P.; O’Hanlon, D.; Caracostea, A.; Pavlidis, P.; Honap, S.; Anandarajah, C.; Griffin, N.; Zeki, S.; et al.
A Retrospective Cohort Study: Pre-Operative Oral Enteral Nutritional Optimisation for Crohn’s Disease in a UK Tertiary IBD
Centre. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2022, 56, 646–663. [CrossRef]

201. Olendzki, B.C.; Silverstein, T.D.; Persuitte, G.M.; Ma, Y.; Baldwin, K.R.; Cave, D. An Anti-Inflammatory Diet as Treatment for

Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Case Series Report. Nutr. J. 2014, 13, 5. [CrossRef]

202. Konijeti, G.G.; Kim, N.; Lewis, J.D.; Groven, S.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Grandhe, S.; Diamant, C.; Singh, E.; Oliveira, G.; Wang,
X.; et al. Efficacy of the Autoimmune Protocol Diet for Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2017, 23, 2054–2060.
[CrossRef]

203. Chandrasekaran, A.; Groven, S.; Lewis, J.D.; Levy, S.S.; Diamant, C.; Singh, E.; Konijeti, G.G. An Autoimmune Protocol Diet
Improves Patient-Reported Quality of Life in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Crohns Colitis 360 2019, 1, otz019. [CrossRef]
204. Levine, A.; Wine, E.; Assa, A.; Sigall Boneh, R.; Shaoul, R.; Kori, M.; Cohen, S.; Peleg, S.; Shamaly, H.; On, A.; et al. Crohn’s Disease
Exclusion Diet Plus Partial Enteral Nutrition Induces Sustained Remission in a Randomized Controlled Trial. Gastroenterology
2019, 157, 440–450.e8. [CrossRef]

205. Szczubełek, M.; Pomorska, K.; Korólczyk-Kowalczyk, M.; Lewandowski, K.; Kaniewska, M.; Rydzewska, G. Effectiveness of
Crohn’s Disease Exclusion Diet for Induction of Remission in Crohn’s Disease Adult Patients. Nutrients 2021, 13, 4112. [CrossRef]
206. Yanai, H.; Levine, A.; Hirsch, A.; Boneh, R.S.; Kopylov, U.; Eran, H.B.; Cohen, N.A.; Ron, Y.; Goren, I.; Leibovitzh, H.; et al. The
Crohn’s Disease Exclusion Diet for Induction and Maintenance of Remission in Adults with Mild-to-Moderate Crohn’s Disease
(CDED-AD): An Open-Label, Pilot, Randomised Trial. Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2022, 7, 49–59. [CrossRef]

207. Sarbagili-Shabat, C.; Albenberg, L.; Van Limbergen, J.; Pressman, N.; Otley, A.; Yaakov, M.; Wine, E.; Weiner, D.; Levine, A.
A Novel UC Exclusion Diet and Antibiotics for Treatment of Mild to Moderate Pediatric Ulcerative Colitis: A Prospective
Open-Label Pilot Study. Nutrients 2021, 13, 3736. [CrossRef]

208. Radziszewska, M.; Smarkusz-Zarzecka, J.; Ostrowska, L.; Pogodzi ´nski, D. Nutrition and Supplementation in Ulcerative Colitis.

Nutrients 2022, 14, 2469. [CrossRef]

209. Svolos, V.; Hansen, R.; Nichols, B.; Quince, C.; Ijaz, U.Z.; Papadopoulou, R.T.; Edwards, C.A.; Watson, D.; Alghamdi, A.; Brejnrod,
A.; et al. Treatment of Active Crohn’s Disease With an Ordinary Food-Based Diet That Replicates Exclusive Enteral Nutrition.
Gastroenterology 2019, 156, 1354–1367.e6. [CrossRef]

210. Pigneur, B.; Ruemmele, F.M. Nutritional Interventions for the Treatment of IBD: Current Evidence and Controversies. Ther. Adv.

Gastroenterol. 2019, 12, 1756284819890534. [CrossRef]

211. Chiba, M.; Abe, T.; Tsuda, H.; Sugawara, T.; Tsuda, S.; Tozawa, H.; Fujiwara, K.; Imai, H. Lifestyle-Related Disease in Crohn’s

Disease: Relapse Prevention by a Semi-Vegetarian Diet. World J. Gastroenterol. WJG 2010, 16, 2484–2495. [CrossRef]

212. Kikut, J.; Konecka, N.; Zi˛etek, M.; Kulpa, D.; Szczuko, M. Diet Supporting Therapy for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Eur. J. Nutr.

2021, 60, 2275–2291. [CrossRef]

213. Larrea, A.; Elexpe, A.; Díez-Martín, E.; Torrecilla, M.; Astigarraga, E.; Barreda-Gómez, G. Neuroinflammation in the Evolution of
Motor Function in Stroke and Trauma Patients: Treatment and Potential Biomarkers. Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 2023, 45, 8552–8585.
[CrossRef]

214. Alghoul, Z.; Yang, C.; Merlin, D. The Current Status of Molecular Biomarkers for Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Biomedicines 2022,

10, 1492. [CrossRef]

215. Jagannath, B.; Lin, K.-C.; Pali, M.; Sankhala, D.; Muthukumar, S.; Prasad, S. A Sweat-Based Wearable Enabling Technology for
Real-Time Monitoring of IL-1β and CRP as Potential Markers for Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2020, 26,
1533–1542. [CrossRef]

216. Wagatsuma, K.; Yokoyama, Y.; Nakase, H. Role of Biomarkers in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Life 2021, 11, 1375. [CrossRef]

217. D’Incà, R.; Sturniolo, G. Biomarkers in IBD: What to Utilize for the Diagnosis? Diagnostics 2023, 13, 2931. [CrossRef]
218. Wang, S.; Hou, Y.; Chen, W.; Wang, J.; Xie, W.; Zhang, X.; Zeng, L. KIF9-AS1, LINC01272 and DIO3OS lncRNAs as Novel

Biomarkers for Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Mol. Med. Rep. 2018, 17, 2195–2202. [CrossRef]

219. Yarani, R.; Mirza, A.H.; Kaur, S.; Pociot, F. The Emerging Role of lncRNAs in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Exp. Mol. Med. 2018,

50, 1–14. [CrossRef]

220. Liu, D.; Saikam, V.; Skrada, K.A.; Merlin, D.; Iyer, S.S. Inflammatory Bowel Disease Biomarkers. Med. Res. Rev. 2022, 42, 1856–1887.

[CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

35 of 37

221. Schönauen, K.; Le, N.; von Arnim, U.; Schulz, C.; Malfertheiner, P.; Link, A. Circulating and Fecal microRNAs as Biomarkers for

Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2018, 24, 1547–1557. [CrossRef]

222. Thorlacius-Ussing, G.; Schnack Nielsen, B.; Andersen, V.; Holmstrøm, K.; Pedersen, A.E. Expression and Localization of miR-21
and miR-126 in Mucosal Tissue from Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2017, 23, 739–752. [CrossRef]
223. Sakurai, T.; Saruta, M. Positioning and Usefulness of Biomarkers in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Digestion 2022, 104, 30–41.

[CrossRef]

224. Schaefer, J.S.; Attumi, T.; Opekun, A.R.; Abraham, B.; Hou, J.; Shelby, H.; Graham, D.Y.; Streckfus, C.; Klein, J.R. MicroRNA

Signatures Differentiate Crohn’s Disease from Ulcerative Colitis. BMC Immunol. 2015, 16, 5. [CrossRef]

225. Vasiliauskas, E.A.; Plevy, S.E.; Landers, C.J.; Binder, S.W.; Ferguson, D.M.; Yang, H.; Rotter, J.I.; Vidrich, A.; Targan, S.R. Perinuclear
Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies in Patients with Crohn’s Disease Define a Clinical Subgroup. Gastroenterology 1996, 110,
1810–1819. [CrossRef]

226. Purnamaningsih, S.M. Serum Markers of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Literature Review. Bali Med. J. 2018, 7. [CrossRef]
227. Ruemmele, F.M.; Targan, S.R.; Levy, G.; Dubinsky, M.; Braun, J.; Seidman, E.G. Diagnostic Accuracy of Serological Assays in

Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Gastroenterology 1998, 115, 822–829. [CrossRef]

228. Chen, P.; Zhou, G.; Lin, J.; Li, L.; Zeng, Z.; Chen, M.; Zhang, S. Serum Biomarkers for Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Med.

2020, 7, 123. [CrossRef]

229. Schwarz, E.; Carson, W.E. Analysis of Potential Biomarkers of Response to IL-12 Therapy. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2022, 112, 557–567.

[CrossRef]

230. Strober, W.; Fuss, I.; Mannon, P. The Fundamental Basis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Clin. Investig. 2007, 117, 514–521.

[CrossRef]

231. Mitsuyama, K.; Niwa, M.; Takedatsu, H.; Yamasaki, H.; Kuwaki, K.; Yoshioka, S.; Yamauchi, R.; Fukunaga, S.; Torimura, T.
Antibody Markers in the Diagnosis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. World J. Gastroenterol. 2016, 22, 1304–1310. [CrossRef]
232. Soubières, A.A.; Poullis, A. Emerging Role of Novel Biomarkers in the Diagnosis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. World J.

Gastrointest. Pharmacol. Ther. 2016, 7, 41–50. [CrossRef]

233. Li, X.; Conklin, L.; Alex, P. New Serological Biomarkers of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. World J. Gastroenterol. WJG 2008, 14,

5115–5124. [CrossRef]

234. Seow, C.H.; Stempak, J.M.; Xu, W.; Lan, H.; Griffiths, A.M.; Greenberg, G.R.; Steinhart, A.H.; Dotan, N.; Silverberg, M.S. Novel
Anti-Glycan Antibodies Related to Inflammatory Bowel Disease Diagnosis and Phenotype. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2009, 104,
1426–1434. [CrossRef]

235. Dotan, I.; Fishman, S.; Dgani, Y.; Schwartz, M.; Karban, A.; Lerner, A.; Weishauss, O.; Spector, L.; Shtevi, A.; Altstock, R.T.; et al.
Antibodies Against Laminaribioside and Chitobioside Are Novel Serologic Markers in Crohn’s Disease. Gastroenterology 2006,
131, 366–378. [CrossRef]

236. Yang, Y.; Fu, K.-Z.; Pan, G. Role of Oncostatin M in the Prognosis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Meta-Analysis. World J.

Gastrointest. Surg. 2024, 16, 228–238. [CrossRef]

237. Li, T.; Qian, Y.; Bai, T.; Li, J. Prediction of Complications in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Using Routine Blood Parameters at

Diagnosis. Ann. Transl. Med. 2022, 10, 185. [CrossRef]

238. Liu, F.; Lee, S.A.; Riordan, S.M.; Zhang, L.; Zhu, L. Global Studies of Using Fecal Biomarkers in Predicting Relapse in Inflammatory

Bowel Disease. Front. Med. 2020, 7, 580803. [CrossRef]

239. Kruzel, M.L.; Zimecki, M.; Actor, J.K. Lactoferrin in a Context of Inflammation-Induced Pathology. Front. Immunol. 2017, 8,

256587. [CrossRef]

240. Haley, K.P.; Delgado, A.G.; Piazuelo, M.B.; Mortensen, B.L.; Correa, P.; Damo, S.M.; Chazin, W.J.; Skaar, E.P.; Gaddy, J.A. The
Human Antimicrobial Protein Calgranulin C Participates in Control of Helicobacter Pylori Growth and Regulation of Virulence.
Infect. Immun. 2015, 83, 2944–2956. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

241. Prata, M.d.M.G.; Havt, A.; Bolick, D.; Pinkerton, R.; Lima, A.; Guerrant, R. Comparisons between Myeloperoxidase, Lactoferrin,
Calprotectin and Lipocalin-2, as Fecal Biomarkers of Intestinal Inflammation in Malnourished Children. J. Transl. Sci. 2016, 2,
134–139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

242. Chami, B.; Martin, N.J.J.; Dennis, J.M.; Witting, P.K. Myeloperoxidase in the Inflamed Colon: A Novel Target for Treating

Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2018, 645, 61–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

243. Mei, K.; Chen, Z.; Wang, Q.; Luo, Y.; Huang, Y.; Wang, B.; Gu, R. The Role of Intestinal Immune Cells and Matrix Metalloproteinases

in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Front. Immunol. 2023, 13, 1067950. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

244. Duvoisin, G.; Lopez, R.N.; Day, A.S.; Lemberg, D.A.; Gearry, R.B.; Leach, S.T. Novel Biomarkers and the Future Potential of

Biomarkers in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Mediators Inflamm. 2017, 2017, e1936315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

245. Pang, Y.; Ruan, H.; Wu, D.; Lang, Y.; Sun, K.; Xu, C. Assessment of Clinical Activity and Severity Using Serum ANCA and ASCA

Antibodies in Patients with Ulcerative Colitis. Allergy Asthma Clin. Immunol. 2020, 16, 37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

246. Bossuyt, X. Serologic Markers in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Clin. Chem. 2006, 52, 171–181. [CrossRef]
247. Mokhtarifar, A.; Ganji, A.; Sadrneshin, M.; Bahari, A.; Esmaeilzadeh, A.; Ghafarzadegan, K.; Nikpour, S. Diagnostic Value of

ASCA and Atypical P-ANCA in Differential Diagnosis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Middle East J. Dig. Dis. 2013, 5, 93–97.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

36 of 37

248. Peeters, M.; Joossens, S.; Vermeire, S.; Vlietinck, R.; Bossuyt, X.; Rutgeerts, P. Diagnostic Value of Anti-Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
and Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Autoantibodies in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2001, 96, 730–734.
[CrossRef]

249. Linskens, R.K.; Mallant-Hent, R.C.; Groothuismink, Z.M.A.; Bakker-Jonges, L.E.; van de Merwe, J.P.; Hooijkaas, H.; von Blomberg,
B.M.E.; Meuwissen, S.G.M. Evaluation of Serological Markers to Differentiate between Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease:
pANCA, ASCA and Agglutinating Antibodies to Anaerobic Coccoid Rods. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2002, 14, 1013–1018.
[CrossRef]

250. Sandborn, W.J.; Landers, C.J.; Tremaine, W.J.; Targan, S.R. Association of Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies with Resistance
to Treatment of Left-Sided Ulcerative Colitis: Results of a Pilot Study. Mayo Clin. Proc. 1996, 71, 431–436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
251. Vasiliauskas, E.A.; Kam, L.Y.; Karp, L.C.; Gaiennie, J.; Yang, H.; Targan, S.R. Marker Antibody Expression Stratifies Crohn’s
Disease into Immunologically Homogeneous Subgroups with Distinct Clinical Characteristics. Gut 2000, 47, 487–496. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

252. Verstockt, S.; Verstockt, B.; Vermeire, S. Oncostatin M as a New Diagnostic, Prognostic and Therapeutic Target in Inflammatory

Bowel Disease (IBD). Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 2019, 23, 943–954. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

253. Jones, S.A.; Jenkins, B.J. Recent Insights into Targeting the IL-6 Cytokine Family in Inflammatory Diseases and Cancer. Nat. Rev.

Immunol. 2018, 18, 773–789. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

254. Cui, G.; Fan, Q.; Li, Z.; Goll, R.; Florholmen, J. Evaluation of Anti-TNF Therapeutic Response in Patients with Inflammatory

Bowel Disease: Current and Novel Biomarkers. eBioMedicine 2021, 66, 103329. [CrossRef]

255. Fousekis, F.S.; Theopistos, V.I.; Katsanos, K.H.; Christodoulou, D.K. Pancreatic Involvement in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A

Review. J. Clin. Med. Res. 2018, 10, 743–751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

256. Gkiouras, K.; Grammatikopoulou, M.G.; Theodoridis, X.; Pagkalidou, E.; Chatzikyriakou, E.; Apostolidou, A.G.; Rigopoulou,
E.I.; Sakkas, L.I.; Bogdanos, D.P. Diagnostic and Clinical Significance of Antigen-Specific Pancreatic Antibodies in Inflammatory
Bowel Diseases: A Meta-Analysis. World J. Gastroenterol. 2020, 26, 246–265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

257. Werner, L.; Paclik, D.; Fritz, C.; Reinhold, D.; Roggenbuck, D.; Sturm, A. Identification of Pancreatic Glycoprotein 2 as an
Endogenous Immunomodulator of Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses. J. Immunol. 2012, 189, 2774–2783. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

258. Pavlidis, P.; Shums, Z.; Koutsoumpas, A.L.; Milo, J.; Papp, M.; Umemura, T.; Lakatos, P.L.; Smyk, D.S.; Bogdanos, D.P.; Forbes, A.;
et al. Diagnostic and Clinical Significance of Crohn’s Disease-Specific Anti-MZGP2 Pancreatic Antibodies by a Novel ELISA. Clin.
Chim. Acta 2015, 441, 176–181. [CrossRef]

259. Michaels, M.A.; Jendrek, S.T.; Korf, T.; Nitzsche, T.; Teegen, B.; Komorowski, L.; Derer, S.; Schröder, T.; Baer, F.; Lehnert, H.;
et al. Pancreatic Autoantibodies Against CUZD1 and GP2 Are Associated with Distinct Clinical Phenotypes of Crohn’s Disease.
Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2015, 21, 2864–2872. [CrossRef]

260. Alomair, A.; Alswayeh, A.; Alhazmi, A.; Alshammari, A.; Alsaffar, S.; Falamarzi, A.; Alothman, M.; Rayes, L.; Alkhathami, M.;
Alhamidah, A. Intestinal Inflammation Markers in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Int. J. Community Med. Public Health 2018, 5,
829–833. [CrossRef]

261. Papp, M.; Lakatos, P.L. Serological Studies in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: How Important Are They? Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol.

2014, 30, 359. [CrossRef]

262. Lewis, J.D. The Utility of Biomarkers in the Diagnosis and Therapy of Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Gastroenterology 2011, 140,

1817–1826.e2. [CrossRef]

263. Tishkowski, K.; Gupta, V. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate. In StatPearls; StatPearls Publishing: Treasure Island, FL, USA, 2024.
264. Khaki-Khatibi, F.; Qujeq, D.; Kashifard, M.; Moein, S.; Maniati, M.; Vaghari-Tabari, M. Calprotectin in Inflammatory Bowel

Disease. Clin. Chim. Acta Int. J. Clin. Chem. 2020, 510, 556–565. [CrossRef]

265. Däbritz, J.; Langhorst, J.; Lügering, A.; Heidemann, J.; Mohr, M.; Wittkowski, H.; Krummenerl, T.; Foell, D. Improving Relapse
Prediction in Inflammatory Bowel Disease by Neutrophil-Derived S100A12. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2013, 19, 1130–1138. [CrossRef]
266. Kopylov, U.; Rosenfeld, G.; Bressler, B.; Seidman, E. Clinical Utility of Fecal Biomarkers for the Diagnosis and Management of

Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 2014, 20, 742–756. [CrossRef]

267. Lin, W.; Chen, H.; Chen, X.; Guo, C. The Roles of Neutrophil-Derived Myeloperoxidase (MPO) in Diseases: The New Progress.

Antioxidants 2024, 13, 132. [CrossRef]

268. Khan, A.A.; Alsahli, M.A.; Rahmani, A.H. Myeloperoxidase as an Active Disease Biomarker: Recent Biochemical and Pathological

Perspectives. Med. Sci. 2018, 6, 33. [CrossRef]

269. Marônek, M.; Marafini, I.; Gardlík, R.; Link, R.; Troncone, E.; Monteleone, G. Metalloproteinases in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases.

J. Inflamm. Res. 2021, 14, 1029–1041. [CrossRef]

270. Derkacz, A.; Olczyk, P.; Olczyk, K.; Komosinska-Vassev, K. The Role of Extracellular Matrix Components in Inflammatory Bowel

Diseases. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10, 1122. [CrossRef]

271. Shamseya, A.M.; Hussein, W.M.; Elnely, D.A.; Adel, F.; Header, D.A. Serum matrix metalloproteinase-9 concentration as a marker
of disease activity in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2021, 33, e803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

272. Gavini, K.; Parameshwaran, K. Western Blot. In StatPearls; StatPearls Publishing: Treasure Island, FL, USA, 2024.
273. Garg, E.; Zubair, M. Mass Spectrometer. In StatPearls; StatPearls Publishing: Treasure Island, FL, USA, 2024.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7062

37 of 37

274. Tamara, S.; den Boer, M.A.; Heck, A.J.R. High-Resolution Native Mass Spectrometry. Chem. Rev. 2022, 122, 7269–7326. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

275. de la Fuente, M.; Rodríguez-Agirretxe, I.; Vecino, E.; Astigarraga, E.; Acera, A.; Barreda-Gómez, G. Elevation of Tear MMP-9
Concentration as a Biomarker of Inflammation in Ocular Pathology by Antibody Microarray Immunodetection Assays. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 5639. [CrossRef]

276. Martin-Souto, L.; Antoran, A.; Areitio, M.; Aparicio-Fernandez, L.; Martín-Gómez, M.T.; Fernandez, R.; Astigarraga, E.;
Barreda-Gómez, G.; Schwarz, C.; Rickerts, V.; et al. Dot Immunobinding Assay for the Rapid Serodetection of Scedospo-
rium/Lomentospora in Cystic Fibrosis Patients. J. Fungi 2023, 9, 158. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

277. Madhvapathy, S.R.; Bury, M.I.; Wang, L.W.; Ciatti, J.L.; Avila, R.; Huang, Y.; Sharma, A.K.; Rogers, J.A. Miniaturized Implantable
Temperature Sensors for the Long-Term Monitoring of Chronic Intestinal Inflammation. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2024, 1–13. [CrossRef]
278. Govindarajan, R.; Duraiyan, J.; Kaliyappan, K.; Palanisamy, M. Microarray and Its Applications. J. Pharm. Bioallied Sci. 2012, 4,

S310–S312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

279. Torres, J.; Bonovas, S.; Doherty, G.; Kucharzik, T.; Gisbert, J.P.; Raine, T.; Adamina, M.; Armuzzi, A.; Bachmann, O.; Bager, P.; et al.
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Crohn’s Disease: Medical Treatment. J. Crohns Colitis 2020, 14, 4–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
280. Elhag, D.A.; Kumar, M.; Saadaoui, M.; Akobeng, A.K.; Al-Mudahka, F.; Elawad, M.; Al Khodor, S. Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Treatments and Predictive Biomarkers of Therapeutic Response. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6966. [CrossRef]

281. Chhibba, T.; Ma, C. Is There Room for Immunomodulators in Ulcerative Colitis? Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 2020, 20, 379–390.

[CrossRef]

282. Gubatan, J.; Keyashian, K.; Rubin, S.J.S.; Wang, J.; Buckman, C.A.; Sinha, S. Anti-Integrins for the Treatment of Inflammatory

Bowel Disease: Current Evidence and Perspectives. Clin. Exp. Gastroenterol. 2021, 14, 333–342. [CrossRef]

283. Núñez, P.; Quera, R.; Yarur, A.J. Safety of Janus Kinase Inhibitors in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Drugs 2023, 83, 299–314.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

284. Sasson, A.N.; Ananthakrishnan, A.N.; Raman, M. Diet in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.

2021, 19, 425–435.e3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

285. Caio, G.; Lungaro, L.; Caputo, F.; Zoli, E.; Giancola, F.; Chiarioni, G.; De Giorgio, R.; Zoli, G. Nutritional Treatment in Crohn’s

Disease. Nutrients 2021, 13, 1628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

286. Gordon, H.; Burisch, J.; Ellul, P.; Karmiris, K.; Katsanos, K.; Allocca, M.; Bamias, G.; Barreiro-de Acosta, M.; Braithwaite, T.;
Greuter, T.; et al. ECCO Guidelines on Extraintestinal Manifestations in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. J. Crohns Colitis 2024, 18,
1–37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

287. Sánchez-Magraner, L.; de la Fuente, M.; Evans, C.; Miles, J.; Elexpe, A.; Rodriguez-Astigarraga, M.; Astigarraga, E.; Barreda-
Gómez, G. Quantification of PD-1/PD-L1 Interaction between Membranes from PBMCs and Melanoma Samples Using Cell
Membrane Microarray and Time-Resolved Förster Resonance Energy Transfer. Analytica 2021, 2, 156–170. [CrossRef]

288. Wu, K.; Tonini, D.; Liang, S.; Saha, R.; Chugh, V.K.; Wang, J.-P. Giant Magnetoresistance Biosensors in Biomedical Applications.

ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 9945–9969. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

289. Hirten, R.P.; Lin, K.-C.; Whang, J.; Shahub, S.; Churcher, N.K.M.; Helmus, D.; Muthukumar, S.; Sands, B.; Prasad, S. Longitudinal
Monitoring of IL-6 and CRP in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Using IBD-AWARE. Biosens. Bioelectron. X 2024, 16, 100435. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

290. Biernacka, K.B.; Bara ´nska, D.; Grzelak, P.; Czkwianianc, E.; Szabelska-Zakrzewska, K. Up-to-Date Overview of Imaging
Techniques in the Diagnosis and Management of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Przegla¸d Gastroenterol. 2019, 14, 19–25. [CrossRef]
291. Frias-Gomes, C.; Torres, J.; Palmela, C. Intestinal Ultrasound in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Valuable and Increasingly

Important Tool. GE Port. J. Gastroenterol. 2021, 29, 223–239. [CrossRef]

292. Bennett, A.L.; Munkholm, P.; Andrews, J.M. Tools for Primary Care Management of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Do They Exist?

World J. Gastroenterol. WJG 2015, 21, 4457–4465. [CrossRef]

293. Mounsif, S.; Setouani, H.; Nadi, A.; Ghalim, F.; Delsa, H. Management of Ulcerative Colitis Flare-Ups in the Era of COVID-19.

Cureus 2022, 14, e32153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

294. Uhlir, V.; Stallmach, A.; Grunert, P.C. Fatigue in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease—Strongly Influenced by Depression
and Not Identifiable through Laboratory Testing: A Cross-Sectional Survey Study. BMC Gastroenterol. 2023, 23, 288. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.