Gastroenterología  y  Hepatología  44   (2021)  312319

Gastroenterología   y  Hepatología

www.elsevier.es/gastroenterologia

REVIEW

Treat-to-target   approach  in   the   management  of
inﬂammatory  Bowel  disease

Paulina  Nu˜nez  F a,∗,  Uma  Mahadevan b,  Rodrigo  Quera c,  Constanza  Bay d,   Patricio  Iba˜nez e

a Division   of   Gastroenterology,   Unversity   of   Chile,   Hospital   San   Juan   de  Dios,   Santiago,   Chile   a   Division   of  Gastroenterology,
Unversity  of   Chile,   Hospital   San   Juan   de   Dios,   Santiago,   Chile
b Division   of   Gastroenterology,   University   of  California,   San   Francisco,   United   States
c Inﬂammatory   Bowel   Disease   Program,   Gastroenterology   Department,   Clínica   Las   Condes,   Santiago,   Chile
d Department   of  Pediatrics,   Pontiﬁcal   Catholic   University   of  Chile,   Santiago,   Chile
e Inﬂammatory   Bowel   Disease   Program,   Gastroenterology,   Chile

Received  23   May   2020;   accepted   29   June   2020
Available   online   16   October   2020

KEYWORDS
Crohn’s   disease;
Ulcerative   colitis;
Treat-to-target;
Monitoring;
Biomarkers

PALABRAS   CLAVE
Enfermedad   de
Crohn;
Colitis   ulcerosa;
Tratamiento   por
objetivos;
Monitorización;
Biomarcadores

∗ Corresponding  author.

Abstract   With   the   advent   of   biologic   and  small   molecule   therapies,   there   has   been   a   substan-
tial  change   in   the   treatment   of   inﬂammatory   bowel   disease.   These   advances   have  had   a   great
impact  in   preventing   disease   progression,   intestinal   damage   and,   therefore,   have   contributed
to  a   better   quality   of   life.   Discordance   between   symptom   control   and   mucosal   healing   has   been
demonstrated.   This   has  led   to   the   search   for   new   disease   control   targets.   The   treat   to   target
strategy,   based   on  expert   recommendations   and  now   a   randomized   controlled   trial,   has   deter-
mined  that   clinical   and  endoscopic   remission   should   be   the   goal   of   therapy.   Biomarkers   (fecal
calprotectin)   can   be   a   surrogate   target.   Although   histological   healing   has  shown   beneﬁts,   there
is  inadequate   evidence   and   inadequate   therapy   for   that   to   be   a   ﬁxed   goal   at   this   time.

This  review   will   focus   on   therapeutic   goals,   according   to   the   evidence   currently   available,

and  evaluate   strategies   to   achieve   them.
©   2020   Elsevier   Espa˜na,  S.L.U.   All   rights   reserved.

Enfoque   «Treat   to   target»  en   el   tratamiento   de   la   enfermedad   inﬂamatoria   intestinal

Resumen   Con   la   llegada   de   las   terapias   biológicas   y   moléculas   peque˜nas,   ha   habido   un   cambio
sustancial   en   el   tratamiento   de   la   enfermedad   inﬂamatoria   intestinal,   lo   que   ha   permitido   evitar
la  progresión   de   la   enfermedad,   el  da˜no   intestinal   y,   por   ende,   mejorar   la   calidad   de   vida   de
estos  pacientes.   Se  ha   demostrado   la   discordancia   entre   el   control   de   los   síntomas   y   la   curación
mucosa,   lo   que   ha  llevado   a   buscar   nuevos   objetivos   de   control   de   la   enfermedad.   La   estrategia
de  control   por   objetivos,   deﬁnido   en   base   a   recomendaciones   de   expertos,   ha   determinado   que

E-mail  addresses:  paulinanunez@gmail.com,  pnunez@med.uchile.cl  (P.  Nu˜nez  F).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gastrohep.2020.06.032
0210-5705/©  2020  Elsevier  Espa˜na,  S.L.U.  All   rights  reserved.

Gastroenterología   y  Hepatología   44   (2021)   312319

se   debe   buscar   en   un   tiempo   establecido   la   remisión   clínica   y   endoscópica.   Hay   estudios   que   han
sugerido  que   los   biomarcadores   (calprotectina   fecal)   deben   ser   parte   de   los   objetivos.   Aunque
la  curación   histológica   ha   demostrado   beneﬁcios,   aún   falta   evidencia   para   que   sea   considerada
como  tal.  Esta   revisión   se   centrará   en   los   objetivos   terapéuticos,   con   la   evidencia   disponible
actualmente,   evaluando   además   las   estrategias   para   alcanzarlos.
©  2020   Elsevier   Espa˜na,   S.L.U.   Todos   los  derechos   reservados.

Introduction

improved

therapeutic   management   of

The
Inﬂammatory   Bowel
Disease   (IBD)   has
in   recent   years   with   new
therapeutic   options   including   biologic   and  small   molecule
therapies.   We   evolved   from   the  use   of   repetitive   courses
of   corticosteroids   to   an  early   introduction   of   therapies   that
can   modify   the  natural   history   of  the   disease.1 Most   of  the
time,   the   correlation   between   symptoms   and   endoscopic
disease   activity   is   poor   and  there   is   a  high   risk   of   reacti-
vation   and   long-term   disease   complications.   The   treat   to
target   approach   (T2T)   proposes   a   serial   evaluation   of  disease
activity   through   objective   clinical,   endoscopic   markers   and
biomarkers.   This   monitoring   will   reduce   ﬂares   and   reduce
future   complications   from   disease   progression.   This   review
will   explain   the  importance   of  these  objectives   for   Ulcera-
tive   Colitis   (UC)  and   Crohn’s   Disease   (CD).

Therapeutic   objectives

Historically   IBD   therapies   sought   symptom   control,   however,
following   the   advent   of   new  therapeutic   modalities,   more
stringent   goals   could   be   sought.2 It  is   mucosal   healing   (endo-
scopic   remission)   which   has   been   associated   with   a  lower   risk
of   reactivation,   hospitalization,   colectomy   requirements,
and   in   the   long   term,  theoretically,   lower   risk   of   progression
to   colorectal   neoplasia.36

In  2015,   a   committee   of   28   specialists   devised  the  ﬁrst
IBD   management   consensus   (STRIDE)   ‘‘Selecting   therapeutic
targets   in   IBD’’,   which  was   based   on   both   clinical   and  endo-
scopic   objectives.7 This   is   where   the  concept   of  ‘‘treat   to
target’’   (T2T)   was   born   for   IBD   (a  term   that   was   conceived   in
rheumatology).   It   involves   the  identiﬁcation   of   a   predeﬁned
objective   which   will   be   pursued   with   appropriate   therapy
with   strict   monitoring   and  optimization.   This   approach   has
led   to  better   long-term   results,   including   clinical,   endo-
scopic,   biomarker,   and   recently   histological   objectives.8,9

Clinical   objectives

It   is   important   to   deﬁne   and   clarify   certain   concepts   such
as   clinical   remission,   clinical   response   and  quality   of   life
objectives   (Fig.  1).1014 IBD  patients   have   a   signiﬁcantly
lower   QoL   compared   to   the  general   population.15 Disease
activity   associates   with   poorer   QoL;   female   gender,   fatigue,
anxiety   levels   and   depression   also   contribute   to   decrease
it.1618 Regarding   the   latter,   there   is   a   signiﬁcant   associa-

tion   between   depression   symptoms   and   clinical   activity   in
CD   (p   =   0.007)   and   UC   (p   =   0.005).19 A  French   national   cross-
sectional   study   evaluating   PRO  showed   that   55.1%   of   CD
patients   and   37.3%   of   UC  patients   had   a  poor   quality   of   life.20
Guidelines   recommended   that   clinical   follow-up   should
be   every   3   months   in  case   of   active   disease   and   every   612
months   during  remission.7

Endoscopic  objectives

Recent   studies   both   in  clinical   trials   and   in  post   hoc   analysis,
have   made   it  possible   to   recommend   endoscopic   healing   as
an   objective   in  patients   with   IBD.   This   objective   is   associ-
ated   with   a  better   prognosis,   lower   hospitalization   rates,   a
lower   risk   of  relapse   and  of   surgical   interventions.21,22

STRIDE   recommends   evaluating   the  resolution   of  ulcers
and   mucosal
in   CD   and
friability   within   69   months
in  UC   after   starting   therapy.7 In   a  recent
36   months
systematic   review,   there   were   no   variations   in  the  times
suggested   to   assess   endoscopic   resolution.23,24

A   study   that   included   a  6-month   follow-up   in  248   UC
patients   observed   a   higher   percentage   risk   of  relapse   in
patients   who   had   reached   an   index   of   Mayo   of   1   vs   the
group   with   a  Mayo   of   0,   (36.6%   vs.   9.4%   with   p  <   0.001).25
Since   accumulated   evidence   would   suggest   there   is  a   bet-
ter   prognosis,   it   has   been  proposed   to  deﬁne   endoscopic
remission   in  UC   as   a   UCEIS   of  0   or  an  endoscopic   Mayo   of
0   points   (Fig.   2).2629 Recently,   deep   remission   (clinical   and
endoscopic)   in   early,   moderate   to   severe   CD  patients   has
been   associated   with   decreased   risk   of  disease   progression
so   endoscopic   remission   became   a  major   stake  in   CD.30

Biomarkers

The   utility   of   FC   in   disease   monitoring   and   as   a  predictor
of   relapse   has   been   established.31,32 It   has   a   high   sensitivity
regarding   endoscopic   activity   in  both   UC   and  CD,   however,
in   CD  the   sensitivity   changes   according   to  phenotype   and
location.33

Using   ROC   curves,   it   was   possible   to   determine   that   in
UC   patients   a   FC  <  200  mcg/g   (AUC   =  0.74)   correlated   with
an   endoscopic   Mayo   of   0,  with   sensitivity   (S),   speciﬁcity
(E),   positive   predictive   value   (PPV)   and   negative   (NPV)   of
0.75,   0.8,   0.22   and   0.98   respectively.   It   was   also   observed
that   the  same   FC   cut-off   point   reﬂected   histological   remis-
sion   with   an  S,  E,   PPV   and  NPV  of   0.71,   0.76,   0.30   and
0.95   respectively.34 Although   the  FC  threshold   that  would

313

P.   Nu˜nez   F,  U.   Mahadevan,   R.  Quera   et   al.

Clinical   objectives   in   IBD.1014 UC,   ulcerative   colitis;   CD,   Crohn’s   disease;   UCDAI,   Ulcerative   colitis   disease   activity   index;
Figure   1
CDAI,  Crohn’s   disease   activity   index;   HBS,   Harvey   Bradshaw   score;   PRO,   patient   related   outcome;   QoL,   quality   of   life.   *   Systematic
review  showed   moderate   validation   for   these   scores14.

Figure   2
of  severity;   SES   CD,   simple   endoscopic   score   for   Crohn’s   disease.

Endoscopic   objectives   in  IBD.2629 UC,   ulcerative   colitis;   CD,   Crohn’s   disease;   UCEIS,   ulcerative   colitis   endoscopic   index

indicate   mucosal   healing   is   still   in  validation.35 In  a   recent
update   on   T2T   management   of  UC,   AGA   proposes   a   cut
point   of   100   mcg/g   to  consider   remission   of   the  disease,23
this   being   conﬁrmed   by   other   authors.36 FC  concentration
can   vary   depending   on   the   location   of   the  disease,   being
lower   at   the   ileal   level.   However,   an  altered   value   of   this
parameter   can  help   to  make   treatment   decisions.37 Thus,   in
patients   with   asymptomatic   CD,   two   measurements   of   ele-
vated   FC   can  predict   a   higher   risk   of   relapse   in  the  following
3   months.38 Therefore,   it   is  recommended   to   carry   out   a   FC
23   months   after   starting   therapy.39

FC   is  also   used   to   monitor   post-surgical   CD,   with   val-
ues   <100   (cid:2)g/g   suggestive   of   remission.40 In   turn,   FC   could
also   be   used   in  those   patients   who   are   scheduled   to   with-
draw   drugs.   In   a   prospective   study   of  160   patients   with
levels   >   100   (cid:2)g/g  at  8  weeks   after   therapeutic
IBD,   FC
de-escalation   was   the  best  threshold   to   predict   clinical
relapse
in   these  patients   with   a  HR   =   3.96   [2.476.35];
p  <   0.0001.41

Radiological   objectives

Imaging   is   a  very   attractive   non-invasive   monitoring   option.
However,   to   date,   studies   only  support   its   use   in  patients
with   CD.23,42 In   a   retrospective   study   of   150   patients   with
CD   observed   for  9  years,   those   with   resolution   of   the  inﬂam-
mation   by   either   computed   tomography   enterography   or
magnetic   resonance   enterography   were   associated   with   a
−0.15   to   0.50)
decrease   in   hospitalizations   (HR   =   0.28,   95   CI
and   surgery   (HR  =  0.34,   95   CI   0.180.63).43 Other   studies
have   also   shown   that   achieving   radiological   remission   would
be   associated   with   a   lower   probability   of   requiring   therapy
optimization,   hospitalizations   and   surgery   at   one-year   term
(HR   =  0.27,   95%   CI   0.130.56;   p  =  0.001.44

Diffusion

shown   high
resonance   modalities   have
sensitivity   in  detecting   mucosal   lesions.   They   could   have
potential   applicability
in  the  future,   with   the   Magnetic
Resonance   Index   of   Activity   (MaRIA)   and   the  Nancy   Index
being   the  most   widely   used.4547

314

Gastroenterología   y  Hepatología   44   (2021)   312319

In  perianal   CD,   studies   have   evaluated   the  percentage
of   remission   with   anti-TNF   by   magnetic   resonance   imaging
(MRI),   with   a  good   inter-observer   correlation   (p   <   0.001).   To
date   new   scores   are   sought   to   achieve   greater   precision.48,49
Ultrasound   (US)   is   another   low-cost,   widely   available,
non-invasive   method   that   allows   evaluating   patients   with
IBD.   This   technique   is   widely   used  in  Europe.   It   can   deter-
mine   wall   thickening,   fat   compromise,   masses,  abscesses,
or   ﬁstulas,   and   Doppler   can   help   assess   the   increase   in  local
vasculature
inﬂammation.   Although   there   are
activity   scores,   none   have   yet   been  validated.50,51 The   Euro-
pean   guidelines   for  Crohn’s   and   Colitis   conclude   that   both
MRI   and   US   have   similar   performance   in  evaluating   activity
in   ileocolonic   CD.52 A  recently   published   study   including   80
CD   patients   treated   with   anti-TNF   for  at   least   one   year,   con-
ﬁrmed   the   usefulness   of  ultrasonography   as   a   non-invasive
method   in   the  follow-up   and   management   of   patients   with
CD.53

indicating

In  STRIDE,   it  was   recommended   to   evaluate   the  resolution
of   the   inﬂammation   by   images   in  CD  when   it  was   not  possible
by   endoscopy,   but   not  in  UC.7 To   date,   there   are   still   no
changes   in   these   objectives.

Histological   objectives

Histological   remission   was   not   recommended   as   a   thera-
peutic   objective   in  the  AGA   systematic   review   in  2019.23
However,   different   studies   have   suggested   that   achieving
histological   remission   in   UC   may   be   associated   with   a  bet-
long-term   prognosis,   regarding   relapse-free   periods,
ter
use   of   corticosteroids   and   hospitalizations.54 Danese   et   al.,
recently   published   that  complete   remission   should   be   con-
sidered   as  one   of   the   main   therapeutic   objectives   in   UC
since   it   is  possible   to   ﬁnd   histological   alterations   even   in
endoscopically   healthy   mucosa.55

remission

Patients   who   achieve   complete

(clinical,
endoscopic   and   histological   remission),   had   a  lower   risk   of
clinical   relapse   than   the  group   that   persisted   with   histo-
logical   activity.56,57 The   presence   of   inﬂammatory   activity
in   biopsies   in   patients   with   endoscopic   mucosal   remission
would   be   associated   with   an  increased   risk   of  clinical   relapse
at   18   months.58 Even   though   only  complete   histologic   nor-
malization   of   the   bowel  (non   segmental   normalization)   was
associated   with   improved   relapse-free   survival   (HR   0.23;  95
CI   0.080.68;   p  =  0.008).59
In  a   Cochrane   review

it  was   established   that  Nancy
Index   and   Robarts   Histopathology   Index   (RHI)   are   the  his-

tological   indices   with   the   highest   validity.   However,   until
now   none   of   them   have  been   fully   validated   to  determine
the  cut-off   point   to   deﬁne   histological   cure.59 This   can   be
observed   in  the   VARSITY   study,   which   is   the  ﬁrst   study   com-
paring   ‘‘head   to   head’’   two   biologic   therapies   (adalimumab
vs.   vedolizumab)   in  patients   with   moderate   to   severe   UC.
Geobes   and  RHI   scores   were   used  to   deﬁne   histological   cure.
The   remission   values   at  52   weeks   for   Geobes   were   10%   for
vedolizumab   and   3%   for   adalimumab   and  for   RHI   38   and  20%
respectively.60,61 The   role   of  histological   remission   in  CD  is
less   clear   and  what   is   known   is   mainly   based  on   retrospective
studies.   However,   in  a  recent   study   comparing   ustekinumab
vs   placebo,   histological   response   at  8   weeks   was   associated
with   a   lower   risk   of   relapse   both   clinically   and   endoscopic
at   44   weeks.62 Furthermore,   in  patients   with   ileal   CD,   his-
tological   rather   than   endoscopic   remission   was   associated
with   a  lower   risk   of   clinical   relapse   (HR   2.05;  p  =   0.031),
need   to   scale   up   in   therapies   (HR   2.17;  p  =  0.011)   and   use
of   corticosteroids   (HR   2.44;   p   =  0.018).62

Currently,   studies   that   validate   scaling   up   therapy   or   de-

escalation   are   still   lacking.63

How   do   we  achieve   those  goals?

introduction

into   clinical   practice   of   pharmacolog-
The
ical   monitoring   of   anti-TNFs,   determining   their   serum
levels   or   the   presence   of   antibodies   against   the  drug,   has
allowed   personalized   therapy   and  thus   a  better   strategy
to  achieve   therapeutic   objectives,   deﬁnitions   in  Table   1.64
However,   pharmacological   monitoring   has   not   currently
been   suggested   for   clinical   practice   for  other   biologics
(vedolizumab   or   ustekinumab)   nor   small  molecule   therapy
(tofacitinib).65,66 It   must   be   considered   that   30%   of   patients
may   have   a  primary   failure   despite   optimization   of  ther-
apy.   Up   to   50%   of   those   who   achieve   endoscopic   and   clinical
remission   goals   may   have   a   loss   of  response.67 The   CALM
study   showed   a   48-week   endoscopic   remission   rate   of   45.9%
in   tight   control   (the   one   that   uses   objective   markers   of
inﬂammation,   which   allows   them  to   optimize   therapies   if
necessary)   vs   30.3%   in  routine   clinical   control   (based   only   on
achieving   clinical   objectives)   with   p  =  0.010.68 In   a  follow-up
study   of   the  CALM   study   with   a  mean   of   3   years,   those   who
achieved   early   (at   12   weeks)   and  deep   remission   had   a   lower
risk   of   disease   progression   regardless   of   being   followed   with
a   conventional   or   strict   approach.69

In   turn,   in  subsequent   analyzes   of   the  TAILORIX   study
showed   that   more   than  the   strategy   used,   it   was   the  high

Table   1

Deﬁnitions   and   concepts   in  therapeutic   goals   in  IBD64.

Therapeutic   drug   monitoring:   measurement   of   drug   levels   and   antibodies,   evaluating   the   effectiveness   of   the   drug,   its

metabolism   and   immunogenicity.   This   management   allows   guiding   therapies   to   adjust   or  change.

1)  Proactive:   is  the   approach   of   empirically   measuring   drugs   levels   and   antibodies   in  order   to   improve   response   rates   and

prevent  loss   of  response   by   looking   for   drug   concentrations   that   are  considered   in   an   optimal   therapeutic   range.
2)  Reactive:   is   the   approach   of   measuring   drugs   levels   and   antibodies   in   patients   that   show   inﬂammatory   activity.

a)  Non-responder   (primary):   patient   in  biologic   therapy   who   does   not   achieve   remission   or   response   after   optimization   of
therapy.
b)  Loss   of   response   (secondary):   a   patient   who   achieves   a  response   with   a   biological   or   small   molecule   drug   but   loses
response  over   time.

315

P.   Nu˜nez   F,  U.   Mahadevan,   R.  Quera   et   al.

Figure   3
ulcerative  colitis.   *In   perianal   disease   would   be   necessary   high   levels   of   anti-TNF.

Drug   Concentration   Targets   for   Anti-TNF   agents   after   Induction   and   during   Maintenance71-74.   *CD   Crohn’s   disease;   UC

Treat   to   target   approach   in  IBD  patients10-14,26-28,37-40,54-58,62.   UC,  ulcerative   colitis;   CD,   Crohn’s   disease;   MRE,   magnetic
Figure   4
resonance  enterography;   US,   ultrasonography;   FC,   fecal   calprotectin.   *   Strongly   suggest   no   recurrent   disease.   **   Highly   associated
with  clinical   remission   at  1  year.

levels   of   inﬂiximab   in  week   2   (>23.1   mg/ml)   and  week   6
(>10   mg/ml)   that   were   associated   with   mucosal   healing   at
12   weeks.70 Optimal   therapeutic   ranges   of  anti-TNF   that
ensure   an   optimal   response   have   been   established   for   both
induction   and   maintenance   (Fig.   3).7174

The   AGA   therapeutic   monitoring   guidelines   recommend
a   reactive   approach,73 meaning   testing   in  those   patients
who   present   with   activity,   without   making   a   recommen-
dation   about   the  proactive   strategy.   Others,   however,
recommend   following   a   reactive   strategy   (in   those   non-
responders   or   secondary
loose   response)   as   well   as   a
proactive   one   (testing   to   maintain   a  desired   level  or   to
induction   therapy).74 An  expert   consensus,   using
titrate
the   Delphi   method,   recommends   checking   levels   of   anti-
TNF   at   the  end   of
induction,   once   during   maintenance
loss   of   secondary   response.
and
This   strategy   is   not  recommended   with   other   biological
therapies.75 In   addition,   the   proactive   strategy   would   allow

in   primary   failure   or

for   a   more   rational   confrontation   when   considering   therapy
retreat.76,77

Is   T2T   practiced  in   ‘‘the  real’’   world?

Although   the   need   for  objective   management
is   clear,
studies   have   shown   differences   in   adherence   to   these.   A
study   carried   out   in   the  United   States   found   that  in   56.4%
of   patients   with   CD   and   in  67.8%   of   the  patients   with   UC,
proactive   management   was   performed   in  a   24-month   follow-
up,   with   colonoscopy   being   the  instrument   most  widely   used
(87.9%).78 A  survey   in  New   Zealand   showed   that   93%   of   gas-
troenterologists   (40/43)   measured   levels   of   anti-TNF   in  the
follow-up   of   patients   treated   with   anti-TNF.   The   main   rea-
son   for   measuring   them   was   lack   of   primary   response   or   loss
of   response   (87%).79

316

Gastroenterología   y  Hepatología   44   (2021)   312319

Conclusion

Early   disease   control,   with   close   monitoring   and   pre-
established   goals   may   be   the  best  way   to   change   the  course
of   the   disease.80

Over   the   years,   the  therapeutic   objectives   of   IBD  have
changed,   advancing   from   clinical   remission   to   deep   remis-
sion   (which
includes   clinical   and   endoscopic   remission).
Today,   it   is   even   more   stringent,   including   quality   of   life   indi-
cators   (PRO)   and  biomarkers,   such   as   FC,   in  the   follow-up   of
patients   with   IBD   and  may   soon   include   histologic   remission.
It   is   important   to   emphasize   that   there   is   more   and   more
information   that   close   monitoring   of  these   objectives   may
change   the   course   of   the  disease.   These   would  indicate   that
achieving   early   histological   remission,   may   avoid   the   long-
term   risks   of   colorectal   cancer.81 Current   therapeutic   goals
are   described   in  Fig.   4.

Considering   the  current   therapeutic   objectives,   the   ques-
tion   that   must   be   answered   is   what   to   do   in  those   patients
who   are   in   clinical   and   endoscopic   remission   but   maintain
histological   activity.   Do   we   need  to   optimize?   In   this,   we
must   undoubtedly   consider   each  patient’s   risk   factors   and
decide   on   a   case-by-case.

Conﬂict  of   interests

The  authors   declare   that   they   have   no   conﬂict   of   interest.

References

1.  Palmela  C,  Torres  J,   Cravo  M.  New  trends  in  inﬂammatory  bowel

disease.  GE  J   Gastroenterol.  2015;22:10311.

2.  Peyrin-Biroulet  L,   Reinisch  W,  Colombel  J,   Mantzaris  G,  Korn-
bluth  A,  Diamond  R,   et   al.  Clinical  disease  activity.  C-reactive
protein  normalisation  and  mucosal  healing  in  Crohn’s  disease  in
the  SONIC  trial.  Gut.  2014;63:8895.

3.  Baars  JE,  Nuiji  VJ,  Oldenbug  B,  Kuipers  EJ,  van  der  Woude  CJ.
Majority  of  patients  with  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease  in  clini-
cal  remission  have  mucosal  inﬂammation.  Inﬂamm  Bowel  Dis.
2012;18:163440.

4.  Baert  F,  Moortgart  L,   Van  Assche  G,  Caenepeel  P,  Vergauwe
P,  De  Vos  M,  et   al.  Mucosal  healing  predicts  sustained  clinical
remission  in  patients  with  early-stage  Crohn’s  disease.  Gas-
troenterology.  2010;138:4638.

5.  Colombel  JF,  Rutgeerts  P,  Reinisch  W,   Esser  D,  Wang  Y,  Lang
Y,  et  al.  Early  mucosal  healing  with  inﬂiximab  is  associated
with  improved  long-term  clinical  outcomes  in  ulcerative  colitis.
Gastroenterology.  2011;14:1194201.

6.  Shah  SC,  Colombel  JF,  Sands  BE,  Narula  N.   Mucosal  healing  is
associated  with  improved  long-term  outcomes  of   patients  with
ulcerative  colitis:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  Clin
Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2016;14:124555.

7.  Peyrin-Biroulet  L,  Sandborn  W,   Sands  BE,  Reinisch  W,  Bemelman
W,  et  al.  Selecting  therapeutic  targets  in   inﬂammatory  bowel
disease  (STRIDE):  determining  therapeutic  goals  for  treat-to-
target.  Am  J  Gastroenterol.  2015;110:132438.

8.  Bouguen  G,   Levesque  BG,  Feagan  BG,   Kavanaugh  A,  Peyrin-
Biroulet  L,   Colombel  JF,  et   al.  Treat  to  target:  a  proposed  new
paradigm  for  the  management  of   Crohn’s  disease.  Clin  Gas-
troenterol  Hepatol.  2015;13:104250.

9.  Battat  R,  Duijvestein  M,  Guizzetti  L,  Choudhary  D,  Boland
rates  of  medical
for  ulcerative  colitis:  a  systematic  review  and

B,  Dulai  P,  et  al.  Histologic  healing
therapies

meta-analysis  of   randomized  controlled  trials.  Am  J  Gastroen-
terol.  2019;114:73345.

10.  Turner  D,  Seow  CH,  Greenberg  GR,  Grifﬁths  AM,  Silverberg
MS,  Steinhart  AH.  A  systematic  prospective  comparison  of
noninvasive  disease  activity  indices  in  ulcerative  colitis.  Clin
Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2009;7:1081.

11.  Thia  KT,  Sandborn  WJ,   Lewis  JD,  Loftus  EV  Jr,  Feagan  BG,  Stein-
hart  AH,  et  al.  Deﬁning  the  optimal  response  criteria  for  the
Crohn’s  disease  activity  index  for  induction  studies  in  patients
with  mildly  to  moderately  active  Crohn’s  disease.  Am  J   Gas-
troenterol.  2008;103:312331.

12.  Jairath  V,  Khanna  R,  Zou  GY,  Stitt  L,   Mosli  M,  Vandervoort
MK,  et   al.  Development  of  interim  patient-reported  outcome
measures  for  the  assessment  of  ulcerative  colitis  disease
activity  in  clinical  trials.  Alimnet  Pharmacol  Ther.  2015;42:
120010.

13.  De  Jong  MJ,  Huibregtse  R,  Masclee  AAM,  Jonkers  DMAE,  Pierik
MJ.  Patient-reported  outcome  measures  for  use  in  Clinical  trials
and  clinical  practice  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease:  a  system-
atic  review.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2018;16:64863.
14.  Van  Andel  EM,  Koopmann  BDM,  Crouwel  F,  Noomen  CG,  de  Boer
NKH,  van  Asseldonk  DP,  et   al.  Systematic  review  of  development
and  content  validity  of   patient-reported  outcome  measures  in
Inﬂammatory  Bowel  Disease:  do  we  measure  what  we  measure?
J  Crohns  Colitis.  2020,  pii:jjaa057.

15.  LeBlanc  K,  Mosli  MH,  Parker  CE,  MacDonald  JK.  The  impact  of
biological  interventions  for  ulcerative  colitis  on  health-related
quality  of  life.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev.  2015.  CD008655.
16.  Gibson  PR,  Vaizey  C,   Black  CM,  Nicholls  R,  Weston  AR,  Bamp-
ton  P,  et  al.  Relationship  between  disease  severity  and  quality
of  life  and  assessment  of   health  care  utilization  and  cost  for
ulcerative  colitis  in  Australia:  a  cross-sectional,  observational
study.  J   Crohns  Colitis.  2014;8:598606.

17.  Parra  RS,  Chebli  JMF,  Amarante  HMBS,  Flores  C,  Parente  JML,
Ramos  O,  et   al.  Quality  of  life,  work  productivity  impairment
and  healthcare  resources  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases  in
Brazil.  World  J  Gastroenterol.  2019;25:586282.

18.  Van  Assche  G,   Peyrin-Biroulet  L,   Sturm  A,  Gisbert  JP,  Gaya  DR,
Bokemeyer  B,  et   al.  Burden  of  disease  and  patient-reported  out-
comes  in  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  ulcerative  colitis  in
the  last  12   months    multicenter  European  cohort  study.  Dig
Liver  Dis.  2016;48:592600.

19.  Mikocka-Walus  A,  Pittet  V,  Rossel  JB,  von  Känel  R,   Swiss
IBD,  Cohort  study  group.  Symptoms  of   depression  and  anx-
iety  are
independently  associated  with  clinical  recurrence
of   inﬂammatory  bowel  disease.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.
2016;14:82935,  e1.

20.  Williet  N,  Sarter  H,  Gower-Rousseau  C,  Adrianjafy  C,  Olympie  A,
Buisson  A,  et   al.  Patient-reported  outcomes  in   a  French  nation-
wide  survey  of  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease  patients.  J  Crohns
Colitis.  2017;11:16574.

21.  Colombel  JF,  Rutgeerts  P,  Reinisch  W,   Esser  D,  Wang  Y,   Lang
Y,  et  al.  Early  mucosal  healing  with  inﬂiximab  is  associated
with  improved  long-term  clinical  outcomes  in  ulcerative  colitis.
Gastroenterology.  2011;141:1194201.

22.  Colombel  JF,  Rutgeerts  PJ,  Sandborn  WJ,  Yang  M,  Camez
A,  Pollack  PF,   et  al.  Adalimumab  induces  deep  remission  in
patients  with  Crohn’s  disease.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.
2014;12:41422.

23.  Ungaro  R,   Colombel  J,  Lissoos  T,  Peyrin-Biroulet  L.   A  treat-
to-target  update  in  ulcerative  colitis:  a  system  review.  Am  J
Gastroenterol.  2019;114:87483.

24.  Rutgeerts  P,  Diamond  RH,  Bala  M,  Olson  A,  Lichtenstein  GR,
et   al.  Scheduled  maintenance  treatment  with
superior  to  episodic  treatment  for  the  healing  of  mucosal  ulcer-
ation  associated  with  Crohn’s  disease.  Gastrointest  Endosc.
2006;63:43342.

inﬂiximab

317

P.   Nu˜nez   F,  U.   Mahadevan,   R.  Quera   et   al.

25.  Barreiro-de  Acosta  M,   Vallejo  N,  de  la  Iglesia  D,   Uribarri  L,  Bas-
ton  I,  Ferreiro-Iglesias  R,  et  al.  Evaluation  of   the  risk  of   relapse
in  ulcerative  colitis  according  to  the  degree  of  mucosal  heal-
ing  (Mayo  0  vs  1):  a  longitudinal  cohort  study.  J  Crohn’s  Colitis.
2016;10:139.

26.  Vuitton  L,  Peyrin  Biroulet  L,  Colombel  JF,  Pariente  B,  Pineton  de
Chambrun  G,   Walsh  AJ,  et   al.  Deﬁning  endoscopic  response  and
remission  in  ulcerative  colitis  clinical  trials:  an  international
consensus.  Aliment  Pharmacol  Ther.  2017;45:80113.

27.  Negreanu  L,  Voiosu  T,  State   M,   Voiosu  A,  Bengus  A,  Mateescu  B.
Endoscopy  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease:  from  guidelines  to
real  life.  Ther  Adv  Gastroenterol.  2019;12:110.

28.  Daperno  M,  Comberlato  M,  Bossa  F,  Biancone  L,  Bonanomi  AG,
Cassinotti  A,  et   al.  Inter-observer  agreement  in  endoscopic  scor-
ing  systems:  preliminary  report  of   an   ongoing  study  from  the
Italian  Group  for  Inﬂammatory  Bowl  Disease  (IG-IBD).  Dig  Liver
Dis.  2014;46:96973.

29.  Vuitton  L,   Marteau  P,  Sandborn  WJ,  Levesque  BG,  Feagan  B,
Vermeire  S,  et   al.  IOIBD  technical  review  on  endoscopic  indices
for   Crohn’s  disease  clinical  trials.  Gut.  2016;65:144755.
30.  Ungaro  RC,  Yzet  C,  Bossuyt  P,  Baert  FJ,  Vanasek  T,
D’Haenes  GR,  et   al.   Deep
remission  at  1  Year  pre-
vents  progression  of   early  Crohn’s  disease.  Gastroenterol-
ogy.  2020,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.039,
pii:S0016-5085(20)  30390-5.

31.  Lasson  A,  Öhman  L,   Stotzer  PO,  Isaksson  S,   Überbacher  O,  Ung
KA,  et  al.  Pharmacological  intervention  based  on  fecal  calpro-
tectin  levels  in  patients  with  ulcerative  colitis  at  high  risk  of
a  relapse:  a  prospective,  randomized,  controlled  study.  United
Eur  Gastroenterol  J.  2015;3:729.

32.  Kostas  A,  Siakavellas  SI,  Kosmidis  C,  Takou  A,  Nikou  J,   Maropou-
los  G,  et  al.  Fecal  calprotectin  measurement  is  a  marker  of
short-term  clinical  outcome  and  presence  of  mucosal  healing
in  patients  with  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease.  World   J   Gastroen-
terol.  2017;23:738796.

33.  Mosli  MH,  Zou  G,  Garg  SK,  Feagan  SG,  MacDonald  JK,  Chande
N,  et  al.  C  reactive  protein,  fecal  calprotectin,  and  stool
lactoferrin  for  detection  of  endoscopic  activity  in  symptomatic
inﬂammatory  bowel  disease  patients:  a   systematic  review  and
meta-analysis.  Am  J   Gastroenterol.  2015;110:80219.

34.  Mak  WY,  Buisson  A,  Andersen  MJ  Jr,  Lei  D,   Pekow  J,  Cohen  RD,
et  al.  Fecal  calprotectin  in  assessing  endoscopic  and  histolog-
ical  remission  in  patients  with  ulcerative  colitis.  Dig  Dis  Sci.
2018;63:1294301.

35.  Boon  GJ,  Mulder  CJ,  Gearry  RB.  Are  faecal  markers  good  indi-
cators  of  mucosa  healing  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease?  World
J  Gastroenterol.  2015;21:1146980.

36.  Dulai  PS,  Jairath  V.  How  do  we  treat  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease
to  aim  for  endoscopic  remission?  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.
2019,  pii:S1542-3565(19)31500-9.

37.  Gecse  KB,  Brandse  JF,  van  Wilpe  S,  Löwenberg  M,   Ponsioen
C,  van  den  Brink,  et  al.   Impact  of  disease  location  on  fecal
calprotectin  levels  in  Crohn’s  disease.  Scand  J   Gastroenterol.
2015;50:8417.

38.  Ma  C,  Battat  R,  Parker  CE,  Khanna  R,  Jairath  V,   Feagan  BG.
Update  on  C-reactive  protein  and  fecal  calprotectin:  are  they
accurate  measures  of   disease  activity  in  Crohn’s  disease?  Expert
Rev  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2019;13:31930.

39.  Gonczi  L,  Bessissow  T,  Lakatos  PL.  Disease  monitoring  strategies
in   inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases:  what  do  we  mean  by  ‘‘tight
control’’?  World  J  Gastroenterol.  2019;25:617289.

40.  Wright  EK,  Kamm  MA,  De  Cruz  P,  Hamilton  AL,  Ritchie  KJ,  Kre-
jany  EO,  et  al.  Measurement  of  fecal  calprotectin  improves
monitoring  and  detection  of   recurrence  of  Crohn’s  disease  after
surgery.  Gastroenterology.  2015;148:93847.

41.  Buisson  A,  Mak  WY,  Andersen  MJ,  Lei  D,   Kahn  SA,  Pekow  J,
et   al.  Faecal  Calprotectin  is  a  very  reliable  tool  to  predict  and
monitor  the  risk  of   relapse  after  therapeutic  de-escalation  in

patients  with  inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases.  J  Crohns  Colitis.
2019;13:101224.

42.  Manetta  R,  Capretti  I,  Lelleggia  N,  Marsecano  C,  Viscido  A,
Bruno  F,   et  al.  Magnetic  resonance  enterography  (MRE)  and
ultrasonography  (US)  in  the  study  of   the  small  bowel  in  Crohn’s
disease:  state  of  art   and  review  of   the  literature.  Acta  Biomed.
2019;90:3850.

43.  Deepak  P,  Fletcher  JG,  Fidler  JL,  Barlow  JM,  Sheedy  SP,  Kolbe
AB,  et  al.  Radiological  response
is  associated  with  better
long-term  outcomes  and  is  a  potential  treatment  target  in
patients  with  small  bowel  Crohn’s  disease.  Am  J  Gastroenterol.
2016;111:9971006.

44.  Fernandes  SR,  Rodrigues  RV,   Bernardo  S,  Cortez-Pinto  J,  Rosa  I,
da  Silva   JP,  et   al.  Transmural  healing  is   associated  with  improved
long-term  outcomes  of   patients  with  Crohn’s  disease.  Inﬂamm
Bowel  Dis.  2017;23:14039.
I,   Rimola  J,  Alfaro

I,  Rodriguez  S,   Castro-Poceiro  J,
Ramírez-Morros  A,  et   al.   Development  and  validation  of   a  sim-
pliﬁed  magnetic  resonance  index  of   activity  for  Crohn’s  disease.
Gastroenterology.  2019;157:4329.

45.  Ordas

46.  Laurent  V,  Naudé  S,   Vuitton  L,   Zallot  C,  Baumann  C,  Girard-
Gavanier  M,  et  al.   Accuracy  of   diffusion-weighted  magnetic
resonance  colonography  in  assessing  mucosal  healing  and  the
treatment  response  in  patients  with  ulcerative  colitis.  J  Crohns
Colitis.  2017;11:71623.

47.  Thierry  ML,  Rousseau  H,  Puillon  L,   Girard-Gavanier  M,   Baumann
C,  Lopez  A,  et  al.  Accuracy  of   diffusion-weighted  magnetic  res-
onance  imaging  in  detecting  mucosal  healing  and  treatment
response,  and  in  predicting  surgery,  in  Crohn’s  disease.  J  Crohns
Colitis.  2018;12:118090.

48.  Van  Assche  G,   Vanbeckevoort  D,   Bielen  D,  Coremans  G,  Aerden
I,  Noman  M,   et   al.  Magnetic  resonance  imaging  of   the  effects
of  inﬂiximab  on  perianal  ﬁstulizing  Crohn’s  disease.  Am  J   Gast.
2003;98:3329.

49.  Van  Rijn  K,   Lansdorp  C,  Tielbeek  J,  Nio  Y,   Buskens  C,  D’Haens  G,
et  al.  Evaluation  of   the  modiﬁed  Van  Assche  index  for  assessing
response  to  anti-TNF  therapy  with  MRI  in  perianal  ﬁstulizing
Crohn’s  disease.  Clin  Imaging.  2020;59:17987.

50.  Kucharzik  T,  Kannengiesser  K,  Petersen  F.  The  use  of  ultra-
inﬂammatory  bowel  disease.  Ann  Gastroentrol.

sound
2017;30:13544.

51.  Bots  S,   Nylund  K,  Löwenberg  M,   Gecse  K,  Giljia  OH,  D’Haens
G.  Ultrasound  for  assessing  disease  activity
IBD  patiets:
a  systematic  review  of   activity  scores.  J   Crohns  Colitis.
2018;12:9209.


52.  Panes  J,  Bouhnik  Y,   Reinisch  W,  Stoker  J,   Taylor  SA,  Baumgart
DC,  et  al.  Imaging  techniques  for  assessment  of  inﬂammatory
bowel  disease:  joint  ECCO  and  ESGAR  evidence-based  consensus
guidelines.  J  Crohns  Colitis.  2013;7:55685.

53.  Zorzi  F,  Ghosh  S,  Chiaramonte  C,  Lolli  E,  Ventura  M,  Onali  S.
Response  assessed  ultrasonography  as  target  of  biological  treat-
ment  for  Crohn’s  disease.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2019,
pii:S1542-3565(19)31244-3.

54.  Christensen  B,  Hanauer  SB,   Erlich  J,  Kassim  O,   Gibson  PR,   Turner
JR,  et  al.  Histologic  normalization  occurs  in  ulcerative  colitis
and  is  associated  with  improved  clinical  outcomes.  Clin  Gas-
troenterol  Hepatol.  2017;15:155764.

55.  Danese  S,  Roda  G,   Peyrin-Biroulet  L.   Evolving  therapeutic  goals
in  ulcerative  colitis:  towards  disease  clearance.  Nat  Rev  Gas-
troenterol  Hepatol.  2020;17:12.

56.  Lobatón  T,  Bessissow  T,   Ruiz-Cerulla  A,  De  Hertogh  G,  Biss-
chops  R,  Guardiola  J.   Prognostic  value  of   histological  activity  in
patients  with  ulcerative  colitis  in  deep  remission:  a  prospective
multicenter  study.  United  Eur  Gastroenterol  J.   2018;6:76572.
57.  Jauregui-Amezaga  A,  Geeritis  A,  Das   Y,  Lemmens  B,  Sagaert
X,  Bessissow  T,  et  al.  A  Simpliﬁed  Geboes  score  for  ulcerative
colitis.  J   Crohns  Colitis.  2017;11:30513.

318

Gastroenterología   y  Hepatología   44   (2021)   312319

58.  Kevans  D,  Kirsch  R,  Dargavel  C,  Kabakchiev  B,  Riddell  R,
Silverberg  MS.  Histological  markers  of   clinical  relapse  in  Endo-
scopical  quiescent  ulcerative  colitis.  Inﬂamm  Bowel  Dis.  2019,
pii:izz308.

59.  Christensen  B,  Hanauer  S,  Gibson  P,  Turner  J,  Hart  J,  Rubin  D.
Segmental  histologic  normalisation  occurs  in  ulcerative  colitis
but  does  not  improve  clinical  outcomes.  J  Crohns  Colitis.  2020,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjaa068.

60.  Mosli  M,  Parker  C,  Nelson  S,   Baker  K,   MacDonald  J,  Zou  GY,  et   al.
Histologic  scoring  indices  for  evaluation  of   disease  activity  in
ulcerative  colitis.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev.  2017.  CD011256.
61.  Sands  BE,  Peyrin-Biroulet  L,  Loftus  EV  Jr,  Danese  S,  Colombel
JF,  Törüner  M,   et  al.  Vedolizumab  versus  adalimumab  for
moderate-to-severe  ulcerative  colitis.  N   Engl  J  Med.  2019;381:
121526.

62.  Novak  G,  Parker  CE,  Pai  RK,  MacDonald  JK,  Feagan  BG,  Sandborn
WJ,  et  al.  Histologic  scoring  indices  for  evaluation  of   disease
activity  in  Crohn’s  disease.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev.  2017;7.
CD012351.

63.  Li  K,  Friedman  JR,  Chan  D,  Pollack  P,  Yang  F,  Jacobstein  D,  et  al.
Effects  of  ustekinumab  on   histologic  disease  activity  in  patients
with  Crohn’s  disease.  Gastroenterology.  2019;157:101931,  e7.
64.  Chateau  T,  Peyrin-  Biroulet  L.  Evolving  therapeutic  goals  in
Crohn’s  disease  management.  United  Eur  Gastroenterol  J.
2020;8:133,  139.

65.  Strik  As,  Bots  SJ,  D’Haens  G,  Löwenberg  M.  Optimization  of
anti-TNF  therapy  in  patients  with  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease.
Expert  Rev  Clin  Pharmacol.  2016;9:42939.

66.  Agrawal  M,  Colombel  JF.  Treat-to-target  in  inﬂammatory  bowel
diseases.  What  is  the   target  and  how  do  we  treat?  Gastrointest
Endosc  Clin  N  Am.  2019;29:42136.

67.  Colombel  JF,  Panaccione  R,  Bossuyt  P,  Lukas  M,  Baert  F,  Vaˇnásek
T,  et  al.  Effect  of   tight  control  management  on  Crohn’s  disease
(CALM):  a   multicenter,  randomised,  controlled  phase  3  trial.
Lancet.  2018;390:277989.

68.  Ben-  Horin  S,  Chowers  Y.  Review  article:  loss  of   response  to  anti-
TNF  treatments  in  Crohn’s  disease.  Aliment  Pharmacol  Ther.
2011;33:98795.

69.  Danese  S,  Sandborn  WJ,  Colombel  JF,   Vermeire  S,  Glover  SC,
Rimola  J.  Endoscopic,  radiologic,  and  histologic  healing  with
vedolizumab  in  patients  with  active  Crohn’s  disease.  Gastroen-
terology.  2019;157:100718.

70.  Dreesen  E,  D’Haens  G,   Baert  F,  et  al.   Inﬂiximab  exposure  pre-
dicts  superior  endoscopic  outcomes  in  patients  with  active
Crohn’s  disease:  pharmacokineticpharmacodynamic  analysis
of  TAILORIX.  J  Crohns  Colitis.  2018;12:S0634.

71.  Papamichael  K,  Cheifetz  AS.  Use  of   anti-TNF  drug

levels
to  optimise  patient  management.  Frontline  Gastroenterol.
2016;7:289300.

72.  Fine  S,  Papamichael  K,   Cheifetz  A.  Etiology  and  management  of
lack  or  loss  of  response  to  anti-tumor  necrosis  factor  therapy
in  patients  with  Inﬂammatory  Bowel  Disease.  Gasteroenterol
Hepatol  (NY).  2019;15:65665.

73.  Egan   C,  Doherty  G.   Why  do  we  need  to

improve  mon-
inﬂammatory  bowel  disease  (IBD)
treatment?  Expert  Opin  Biol  Ther.  2019;19:

itoring  of  patients  with
on  biologic
90718.

74.  Feuerstein  JD,  Nguyen  GC,  Kupfer  SS,  Falck-Ytler  Y,  Singh  S.
American  Gastroenterological  Association  institute  guideline  on
therapeutic  drug  monitoring  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease.
Gastroenterology.  2017;153:82734.

75.  Mitrev  N,  Vande  Casteele  N,  Seow  CH,  Andrew  JM,  Connor
SJ,  Moore  GT,  et  al.  Review  article:  consensus  statements
on  therapeutic  drug  monitoring  of  anti-tumour  necrosis  fac-
tor  therapy  in   inﬂammatory  bowel  diseases.  Aliment  Pharmacol
Ther.  2017;46:103753.

76.  Papamichel  K,   Cheifetz  AS,  Melmed  GY,

Irving  PM,  Van  de
Casteele  N,  Kozuch  PL,  et  al.  Appropriate  therapeutic  drug
monitoring  of  biological  agents  for  patients  with
inﬂam-
matory  bowel  disease.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.  2019;17:
165568.

77.  Papamichael  K,  Vogelzang  E,  Lambert  J,  Wolbink  G,  Cheifetz.
Therapeutic  drug  monitoring  with  biologic  agents  in  immune
Inmunol.
inﬂammatory  disease.  Expert  Rev   Clin
mediated
2019;15:83748.

78.  Shah  R,  Hoffman  GR,  El-Dallal  M,  Goldowsky  AM,  Chen  Y,  Feuer-
stein  JD.  Is  therapeutic  drug  monitoring  for  anti-  tumor  necrosis
factor  agents  in  adults  with  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease  ready
for  standard  care?  A   systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  J
Crohns  Colitis.  2020  Feb  17,  pii:jjaa029.

79.  Limketkai  BN,  Singh  S,   Jairath  V,  Sandborn  W,  Dulai  PS.  US
practice  patterns  and  impacts  of   monitoring  for  mucosal  inﬂam-
mation  after  biologic  initiation  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease.
Inﬂamm  Bowel  Dis.  2019;25:182837.

80.  Le   Berre  C,  AnanthakrishnanA,  Danese  S,  Singh  S,   Peyrin-
Biroulet  L.   Ulcerative  colitis  and  Crohn’s  disease  have  the  same
burden  and  goals  for  treatment.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol.
2020;18:1423.

81.  Samaan  MA,  Arkir  Z,  Ahmad  T,  Irving  PM.  Wide  variation  in  the
use  and  understanding  of   therapeutic  drug  monitoring  for  anti-
TNF  agents  in  inﬂammatory  bowel  disease:  an  inexact  science?
Expert  Opin  Biol  Ther.  2018;18:12719.

319