Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

w w  w  .   r  e u m a t o l o g i a c l i n i c a . o r g

Review   Article
Systemic   Lupus   Erythematosus:   Is  It   One   Disease?(cid:2)
Francisco   Rivas-Larrauri,   Marco   Antonio   Yamazaki-Nakashimada∗

Servicio  de  Inmunología  Clínica,  Instituto  Nacional  de  Pediatría  Insurgentes  Sur,  Mexico  City,  Mexico

a   r  t  i   c   l  e

i   n  f  o

a   b   s   t   r  a   c  t

Article  history:
Received  10  November  2015
Accepted  8  January  2016
Available  online  27  July  2016

Keywords:
Systemic  lupus  erythematosus
Primary  immunodeﬁciency
Interferonopathy
Complement  deﬁciency

Palabras  clave:
Lupus  eritematoso  sistémico
Inmunodeﬁciencia  primaria
Interferonopatía
Deﬁciencia  de  complemento

Systemic  lupus  erythematosus  (SLE)  is  a   multisystemic   disease  with   a   variety  of  clinical  presentations.
Monogenic  predisposing  conditions  to   the   development   of  this   disease  have  been   described.  As  examples,
an   impaired  expression   of  interferon-(cid:2)   regulated  genes   or   complement   deﬁciencies  have   been  reported
in  patients   with   SLE,   with  particular   clinical   presentations.   Those   defects  present   particular   presentations
and   a  different  severity,   making   an   argument   that   lupus  is  not   a   single  disease   but  many.  Treatment   could
be  individualized   depending   on  the   underlying  defect   generating   the   subtype   of  the   disease.

©  2015  Elsevier   Espa ˜na,  S.L.U.  and   Sociedad   Espa ˜nola  de   Reumatolog´ıa  y   Colegio  Mexicano   de
Reumatolog´ıa.   All   rights   reserved.

Lupus   eritematoso   sistémico:   ¿es   una   sola   enfermedad?

r   e   s  u   m  e   n

El  lupus  eritematoso   sistémico   (LES)   es  una  enfermedad   multisistémica   poseedora   de   una   gran   variedad
de   presentaciones  clínicas.   Se   han  descrito  enfermedades   monogénicas   que   predisponen  la  aparición   de
LES.   Como  ejemplos  tenemos   a   los  defectos   en  los  genes   reguladores   de   la  expresión  de   interferón  alfa  o  a
nivel   del   complemento,   que   presentan  comportamientos   clínicos   particulares.   Estos   defectos  presentan
una  presentación  y   severidad   distintas,  por  lo   que  se  puede   argumentar   que  el  lupus  no  es  una   sola
enfermedad   sino  varias.   El  tratamiento  se  podría   individualizar   dependiendo   del  defecto   subyacente   que
genere   el  subtipo  de   lupus.

©   2015   Elsevier  Espa ˜na,  S.L.U.  y
Sociedad   Espa ˜nola  de   Reumatolog´ıa  y   Colegio   Mexicano  de  Reumatolog´ıa.  Todos  los   derechos   reservados.

Introduction

Systemic  lupus  erythematosus  (SLE)  is  a   multisystem  disease
with  a  wide  variety  of  clinical  presentations,  caused  by   the  pro-
duction  of  autoantibodies,  complement  activation  and  immune
complex  deposition.1 Research  on  SLE  is  incredibly  intense  and,
since  1946,  around  56  000  manuscripts  touching  on  this  subject
have  been  published.

The  onset  of  between  20%  and  30%  of  the  cases  of  lupus  occurred
during  childhood.  There  are   differences  with  respect  to  adult-
onset  lupus  in  that  the  female-to-male  ratio  is  less  marked  in

(cid:2)


Please  cite  this  article  as:   Rivas-Larrauri  F,  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  MA.
Lupus  eritematoso  sistémico:  ¿es   una   sola  enfermedad?  Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12:
274–281.

Corresponding  author.
E-mail  address:  yzki71@yahoo.com.mx  (M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada).

children  (4:1,  in  contrast  to  9:1  in  adults)  and  the  disease  is
more  serious.2,3 Webb  et  al.4 reported  a  more  severe  phenotype
of  SLE  in   patients  in  whom  onset  took  place  at  a   pediatric  age
(pSLE),  with  a  higher  incidence  of  proteinuria,  malar  rash,  anti-
double  stranded  DNA  (anti-dsDNA),  hemolytic  anemia,  arthritis
and  leukopenia  in  comparison  with  adult-onset  SLE.  This  where
we  begin  to   observe  differences  in   the  clinical  picture  of  what  we
now  know  as  lupus.  Another  marked  difference  in   childhood-onset
lupus  is   its  strong  association  with  primary  immunodeﬁciencies
(PID).5–7 In  this  respect,  Liphaus  et  al.8 published  an  interesting
study  in  which  they  analyzed  72  patients  with  pSLE,  searching
intentionally  for  possible  cases  of  PID;  they  found  a  deﬁciency
in  16  patients  (22%).  Three  patients  had  C2  deﬁciency,  another  3
had  C4  deﬁciency,  2  had  C1q  deﬁciency,  4  had  IgG2  deﬁciency,
3  had  IgA  deﬁciency,  3  had  IgM  deﬁciency  and  1  had  a   simul-
taneous  C2,  IgA  and  C4  deﬁciency.  It  is   noteworthy  that,  in   this
group  of  patients,  the  disease  activity  index  was  much  higher  com-
pared  to  the  rest  of  the  patients.  Thus,  the  authors  suggest  that

2173-5743/©  2015  Elsevier  Espa ˜na,  S.L.U.  and  Sociedad  Espa ˜nola  de  Reumatolog´ıa  y   Colegio  Mexicano  de  Reumatolog´ıa.  All   rights  reserved.

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /  Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

275

Table   1
Single-gene  Defects  Associated  With  Systemic  Lupus  Erythematosus.

Mutation

Mechanism

Clinical  manifestations

Complement  deﬁciencies  (C1q,  C1r,  C1s,  C2,  C4)

Chronic  infections
Impaired  clearance  of  apoptotic  cells  and
immune  complexes

PKC(cid:3)   deﬁciency

Excessive  B-cell  proliferation  (apoptosis)

Prolidase  deﬁciency

Alteration  in  C1q

Interferonopathy  (TREX1,  IFIH1,  ADAR)

Increase  in   IFN(cid:2)

RASopathy  (RAS/MAPK  pathway)

Leukocyte  proliferation
Defective  apoptosis

Mutation  in  DNASE1L3

Alteration  in  DNA  removal

CMV,  cytomegalovirus;  dsDNA,  double-stranded  DNA;  EBV,  Epstein–Barr  virus;  PKC,  protein  kinase  C.

Recurrent  infections
Early  onset
Prominent  cutaneous  manifestations
Absence  of  anti-dsDNA  antibodies
Hepatosplenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
EBV  or  CMV  infection
Recurrent  infections
Elevated  IgE
Cutaneous  manifestations  (telangiectasias)
Facial  dysmorphia
Lupus  pernio
Basal  ganglion  calciﬁcation
Increased  rate  of  pericarditis
Little  skin  involvement
Splenomegaly,  lymphadenopathy
Association  with  Noonan  syndrome
Risk  of  malignant  transformation
Urticaria,  cutaneous  vasculitis,  Recurrent  abdominal  pain,
uveitis,  episcleritis,  glomerulonephritis  with  anti-C1q
antibodies

in  cases  of  severe  pSLE,  it  is  necessary  to   look  for  an  underlying
PID.

Genetic  factors  that  have  a  fundamental  inﬂuence  on  the  devel-
opment  of  this  disease  have  been  identiﬁed.  Monozygotic  twins
have  a  20%–40%  higher  risk  of  developing  SLE,  whereas  in   het-
erozygous  individuals,  the  risk  is  only  2%–5%  higher,  suggesting
the   importance  of  genetic  defects  as  determining  factors  of  this  dis-
ease,  even  if  there  is   no  associated  inheritance  pattern.  Although  the
inheritance  pattern  is   complex,  they  could  be  different  conditions
classiﬁed  as  a  single  disease.  The  existence  of  several  genetic  origins
would  explain  the  variety  of  phenotypes  encountered  in   the  clinical
disease  (that  is  probably  the  origin  of  reports  of  cases  described  as
lupus-like).7,9 Occasionally,  SLE  has  been  associated  with  single-
gene  defects  with  well-deﬁned  clinical  behaviors  (Table  1).  The
relationship  of  genetic  defects  with  the  immune  system  and  the
development  of  SLE  is  a   subject  that  is  beginning  to  be  discovered.9

In  this  review,  our  purpose  is   to  provide  arguments  to  support  the
concept  of  the  existence  of  several  different  diseases  (lupus-like
diseases  or  subtypes  of  lupus)  encompassed  in   what  we   know  today
as  SLE  (Fig.  1)

Complement  Deﬁciencies

We  know  that  patients  with  deﬁciencies  in   the  initial  phases
of  the  complement  pathways  (C1q,  C2  and  C4)  have  a  greater
predisposition  for  developing  autoimmune  diseases.  In  fact,  C1q
deﬁciency  is  considered  to   be   the  genetic  factor  with  the  strongest
risk  and  fraction  C2  deﬁciency  to  be  that  most  frequently  asso-
ciated  with  SLE.10–12 For  a  clinical  datum,  we   have  the  fact  that
lupus  generally  has  an  early  onset  and  there  is  no  predominance
of  one  gender  over  the  other.  Moreover,  it  is   associated  with  the

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS

LUPUS
Protein kinase Cδ
deficiency


LUPUS
Interferon-alpha


LUPUS
Complement
deficiency

LUPUS
Hypocomplementemic
urticarial vasculitis


LUPUS
Thrombosis



LUPUS
Prolidase
deficiency

LUPUS
DOCK8
deficiency


LUPUS
Autoimmune
lymphoproliferative
syndrome
Defective apoptosis


Fig.  1.   Different  genetic  defects  produce  different  lupus-like  diseases.

276

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /   Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

presence  of  recurrent  infections.  Why   do   patients  with  complement
deﬁciencies  develop  more  severe  autoimmunity?  There  are  several
factors  that  could  act  alone  or  together:  (1)  as  a   consequence  of  the
constant  immune  activation  by   a   chronic  viral  infection;  (2)  an  asso-
ciation  with  human  leukocyte  antigen  (HLA),  as  the  complement
components  C2,  C4  and  factor  B  are  in   the  major  histocompatibility
complex;  (3)  the  importance  of  complement  in   immune  tolerance;
(4)  the  role  of  complement  in   the  solubilization  of  the  immune  com-
plexes  by  reducing  their  size  and  increasing  their  clearance  from
the  circulation;  the  immune  complexes  bound  to  C3b  bind  to  the
C3b  receptor  located  in  erythrocytes  (CD35),  which,  in   this  way,  are
transported  to  the  Kupffer  cells  in   the  liver  and  their  renal  deposi-
tion  is  prevented;  and  (5)  the  role  of  complement,  particularly  C1q,
in  the  clearance  of  apoptotic  cells,  which,  being  impaired,  permits
a  greater  exposition  to  autoantigens.13–17

There  are  differences  between  the  rheumatic  diseases  of
patients  with  complement  deﬁciency  when  compared  with  those  in
whom  this  deﬁciency  is   absent.  One  example  is   the  case  of  patients
with  C2  deﬁciency,  who  are  more  likely  than  others  to  have  pho-
tosensitivity  dermatitis,  low  positivity  for  anti-dsDNA  antibodies
and  high  anti-Ro  titers.18–20 On  the  other  hand,  patients  with  C1q
deﬁciency  have  a   very  early  onset,  prominent  cutaneous  manifes-
tations  and  substantial  damage  to   target  organs,  with  cerebritis  and
nephritis.21,22

There  are  multiple  mutations  that  occur  on  each  of  the  3  genes
responsible  for  C1q  deﬁciency,  which  are  found  in  the  long  arm  of
chromosome  1.21

Approximately  38  families  have  been  reported  to  have  con-
ﬁrmed  C1q  deﬁciency,  and  it  is  estimated  that  90%  develop  SLE.21
In  a  study  of  41  patients,  the  majority  had  rash  (98%),  and  glomeru-
lonephritis  was  also  common  (39%).  An  interesting  ﬁnding  is   that
tests  for  anti-dsDNA  antibodies  are  usually  negative.23

The  case  reported  by   Arkwright  et  al.24 is  particularly  relevant:
a  17-year-old  boy  with  a   history  of  parental  consanguinity  and  the
deaths  of  his  brothers  due  to  infections,  in   whom  C1q  deﬁciency  and
SLE  were  detected.  He  underwent  hematopoietic  stem  cell  trans-
plantation,  which  cured  his   SLE.  The  majority  of  the  complement
factors  are  proteins  that  are   synthesized  in  the  liver.  For   this  reason,
patients  with  this  type  of  PID  do  not  usually  undergo  hematopoietic
stem  cell  transplantation;  however,  the  explanation  for  the  per-
formance  of  transplantation  in   the  aforementioned  patient  is  the
monocyte  production  of  C1q,  with  the  resulting  resolution  of  the
disease.24

C2  deﬁciency  is  the  most  common  homozygous  deﬁciency,  with
a  prevalence  of  1  per  20  000  population.  In  all,  10%–20%  of  the
cases  have  been  associated  with  SLE.  The  main  manifestations  of
patients  with  C2  deﬁciency  are  infections;  approximately  50%  of
the  patients  are  susceptible  to  infectious  processes,  especially  sep-
sis,  meningitis,  arthritis  and  osteomyelitis  caused  by  encapsulated
bacteria  (Hemophilus
inﬂuenzae,   pneumococci,  meningococci).
When  they  develop  autoimmunity,  the  system  most  affected  is   the
cardiovascular  system,  and  tests  for  anticardiolipin  antibodies  are
frequently  positive.  The  cause  of  death  is  early  atherosclerosis,  as
well  as  infectious  processes.  Other  deﬁciencies,  like  those  of  C4  and
properdin,  have  also  been  associated  with  the  development  of  SLE.
C3  deﬁciency  is  also  associated  with  recurrent  infections,  but  can
also  produce  signs  of  lupus,  such  as  fever,  rash,  glomerulonephritis
and  arthritis,  in  up   to  28%  of  the  patients.  It   has  been  reported  that
the  use  of  fresh  frozen  plasma  could  be   a  therapeutic  alternative,
as  could  rituximab.25

Systemic  Lupus  Erythematosus:  An  Interferonopathy?

The  behavior  of  type  I  interferons  (IFN)  is  highly  variable
and  depends  on  the  diseases  with  which  they  are  related.  For

example,  while  in   patients  with  multiple  sclerosis  and  arthritis  they
have  an  inhibitory  effect  on  the  Th17  response  and,  thus,  on  the
disease  activity  in  SLE,  they  are   capable  of  inducing  disease  activ-
ity  through  different  mechanisms.26–31 Type  I  IFN  comprise  around
13  molecules,  including  IFN(cid:2),   IFN(cid:4),   IFN(cid:5),  IFN(cid:6)  and  IFN(cid:7),   and  the
genes  that  encode  them  are  located  on  chromosome  9.  Interferons
have  the  capacity  to  activate  the  innate  immune  response  through
Toll-like  receptors  3,  7,  8  and  9.  They  are  mainly  produced  in  the
nucleated  cells,  plasmocytoid  dendritic  cells  and  monocytes.  It  has
been  found  that,  in   SLE  patients,  these  cytokines  are  capable  of
inducing  the  production  of  immune  complexes  directed  against
nucleic  acids,  this  through  IFN  regulatory  factors.28

The  effects  of  IFN(cid:2)  in  a   healthy  population  involve  the  mat-
uration  of  dendritic  cells,  activation  of  natural  killer  (NK)  cells,
increases  in   the  Th1  immune  response,  in  CD8+  T   lymphocytes,
in  memory  cells  and  in  B-lymphocyte  stimulator  (Blys/BAFF)  and
an  improvement  in  immunoglobulin  response.  In  patients  with  SLE,
while  they  increase  the  levels  of  Blys,  on  the  other  hand,  they  reduce
the  regulatory  cells  (CD4-FoxP3).32

A   clinical  example  that  involves  a  well-established  genetic
defect,  and  includes  the  association  of  SLE  and  IFN,  is  Aicardi-
Goutières  syndrome  (AGS),  ﬁrst  described  in  1984  by   Jean  Aicardi
and  Franc¸  oise  Goutières,  who   detected  patients  with  calcifying
vasculitis,  leukodystrophy  and  progressive  encephalopathy  in   the
absence  of  infection  caused  by  the  TORCH  syndrome  (Toxoplasma
gondii,  Others  [human  immunodeﬁciency  virus,  Treponema  pal-
lidum,  etc.],  Rubella,  Cytomegalovirus  [CMV]  and  Herpes  virus).  In
1988,  Pierre  Lebon  detected  high  IFN(cid:2)  levels  and  lymphocytosis  in
the  cerebrospinal  ﬂuid  of  patients  with  this  syndrome;  IFN(cid:2)   is   even
considered  a   prenatal  marker  that  can  lead  to  the  suspicion  of  this
disease.33,34

In   2006,  Yannick  Crow  and  Andrew  Jackson  and  their  collabora-
tors  identiﬁed  mutations  in  4  different  genes:  TREX1,  RNASEH2B,
RNASEH2C  and  RNASEH2A;  subsequently,  a  ﬁfth  mutation,  referred
to  as  SAMHD1,  was  discovered.  These  5  defects  are  estimated  to
account  for  90%  of  the  mutations  known  to  cause  AGS.35 More
recently,  other  genes  involved  have  been  identiﬁed:  SAMHD1,
ADAR  and  IFIH1.

In  a   review  of  26  patients  diagnosed  with  AGS,  Ramantani
et  al.28 report  a   high  prevalence  (60%)  of  manifestations  associated
with  SLE,  such  as  thrombocytopenia,  leukopenia,  positive  test  for
antinuclear  antibodies  (ANA),  erythematous  lesions,  lupus  pernio,
oral  ulcers  and  arthritis.  This  fact  leads  to  the  suspicion  that  the
same  genetic  defect  that  predisposes  to  AGS  has  an  impact  on  the
immune  system  that  involves  a  risk  factor  for  the  development  of
lupus.  The  common  denominator  between  AGS   and  SLE  known  at
the  present  time  is   the  series  of  metabolic  changes  induced  by  the
IFN,  speciﬁcally  IFN(cid:2).  The  correlation  between  high  levels  of  this
cytokine  and  the  activity  of  lupus  is  well-established.  There  are
reports  of  patients  who  have  both  AGS  and  SLE,32,36 in   addition
to   heterozygous  mutations  in  TREX1  in  chilblain  lupus.37–39 The
mutation  of  TREX1  has  been  related  to  an  autoimmune  spectrum
that  includes  AGS,  familial  lupus  pernio,  retinal  vasculopathy  with
cerebral  leukodystrophy  and  SLE  itself.  The  TREX1  gene  encodes  a
DNA  exonuclease  and  its  mutation  produces  a   degradation  of  dys-
functional  DNA.40–43 The  same  occurs  with  mutations  in  IFIH1,  with
a   broad  spectrum  in  relation  to   the  phenotypes  encountered.  This
defect  was   found  in   a   16-year-old  patient  with  early  onset  SLE  that
was  refractory  to  treatment.44 Moreover,  when  the  whole  exome
was  sequenced,  the  pathogenic  mutation  was   detected  in  another
SLE  patient,  a   4-year-old  girl  with  cerebral  involvement.40 In  a
series  in   which  the  molecular  defect  was  characterized  in  a  large
group  of  patients  with  AGS,  only  4  had  SLE  (2ADAR,  2IFIH1),  indicat-
ing  that  the  frequency  is   low.  Some  of  the  patients  had  oral  ulcers,
progressive  arthropathy  or  intracranial  vasculopathy,  evidence
that  the  spectrum  of  inﬂammatory  manifestations  is   extensive.45

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /  Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

277

Stimulator  of  interferon  genes  (STING)  is   a  transmembrane
protein  that  resides  as  a   dimer  in  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  of
epithelial  and  endothelial  cells,  macrophages  and  dendritic  cells.
It  is  essential  for  the  production  of  cytokines  like  type  I  IFN  in
response  to  pathogens  related  to  double-stranded  DNA.  Muta-
tions  affecting  STING  have  been  related  to  some  forms  of  SLE.  Four
members  of  a  family  had  a  systemic  inﬂammatory  syndrome  with
vasculopathy,  pulmonary  ﬁbrosis  and  autoimmunity.46 The  index
case  had  fever,  malar  rash,  lung  disease  and  positive  tests  for  ANA
and  anti-dsDNA  antibodies.  One  current  line  of  research  is  the  eval-
uation  of  therapy  aimed  against  IFN(cid:2)   in   SLE  (rontalizumab).47–49

RASopathies

infections.  There

is   a   breakdown  of

Somatic  gain-of-function  mutations  in  members  of  the  sub-
family  of  RAS  guanosine  triphosphatases  have  been  found  in   up
to  30%  of  all  human  cancers.  Variants  of  autoimmune  lympho-
proliferative  syndrome  have  been  reported  to  carry  mutations  in
NRAS  and  KRAS,  two  members  of  this  family.50–57 This  entity  has
been  referred  to  as  RAS-associated  autoimmune  leukoproliferative
disease,  and  the  patients  have  splenomegaly,  lymphadenopathy,
autoimmune  cytopenias  and  hypergammaglobulinemia,  as  well
as  recurrent
leukocyte
homeostasis  affecting  apoptosis.  RASopathies  are  a  group  of
genetically-deﬁned  diseases  that  include  Noonan  syndrome  (NS)
and  other  related  conditions.  These  syndrome  are  characterized
by  neurodevelopmental  defects  that  result  in   mutations  in   genes
encoding  components  or  regulators  of  the  RAS/MAPK  pathway.57
There  are  cases  of  NS   with  single-gene  defects  associated  with  the
development  of  SLE  reported  in  the  literature.52–56 Such  is  the  case
of  a  13-year-old  boy  with  a   diagnosis  of  NS  and  hair  loss,  with  a
well-deﬁned  mutation  in   SHOC2.  He  had  pericarditis,  polyarthritis,
massive  lymphadenopathy,  hepatosplenomegaly  and  positive  tests
for   ANA  and  anti-dsDNA.  He  was  treated  with  aspirin  and  hydrox-
ychloroquine,  which  resulted  in  remission  of  all  the  symptoms
except  hepatosplenomegaly  and  lymphadenopathy.57 For  this  rea-
son,  Bader-Meunier  suggests  that  some  SLE  patients  could  have   a
RASopathy.52,53

Protein  Kinase-C(cid:2)  Deﬁciency

Belot  et  al.58 reported  the  cases  of  3  patients,  born  to  con-
sanguineous  parents,  who  met   SLE  criteria.  In  1  of  them,  the
manifestations  were  suggestive  of  autoimmune  lymphoprolifera-
tive  syndrome  with  hepatosplenomegaly  and  lymphadenopathy.
All  3   patients  presented  with  nephritis  and  positive  tests  for  ANA
and  anti-dsDNA,  and  some  had  cutaneous,  joint,  neurological  and
hematological  involvement.  Protein  kinase-C(cid:3)  (PKC(cid:3))   is  a   ser-
ine/threonine  kinase  involved  in  the  control  of  cell  proliferation
and  apoptosis,  and  its  absence  is  associated  with  an  excessive  pro-
liferation  of  B  cells.  We   should  point  out  that  the  patients  did
not  have  recurrent  infections.59 On  the  other  hand,  Kuehn  et  al.59
report  another  case  of  PKC(cid:3):  a  Mexican  male  from  an  endogamous
community,  who  did  have  recurrent  infections  (otitis,  sinusitis),  in
addition  to  chronic  Epstein–Barr  virus  infection.  The  ﬁndings  in  this
patient  were  indicative  of  autoimmune  lymphoproliferative  syn-
drome  with  elevated  transaminase  levels  and  hyperglobulinemia
but,  although  he  was  not  diagnosed  with  SLE,  he  had  malar  rash  and
positive  tests  for  ANA  and  anti-Sm  antibodies.  Kiykim  et  al.60 report
the  case  of  a  3-year-old  boy,  the  son  of  consanguineous  parents,
with  early  manifestations  including  intermittent  fever,  myositis,
alopecia,  photosensitivity,  hypotonia,  cervical  lymphadenopathy
and  hepatosplenomegaly.  A  skin  biopsy  revealed  lupus.  The  patient
had  CMV   and  decreased  NK-cell  function.  The  genetic  study  identi-
ﬁed  a  novel  mutation  in   PKC(cid:3).  According  to  the  authors,  the  patient

had  a   spectacular  response  to  hydroxychloroquine,  in  combination
with  trimethoprim  and  intravenous  immunoglobulin.  Thus,  in  this
subtype  of  SLE,  there  is   a   predominance  of  lymphoproliferation  and,
in   some  cases,  susceptibility  to   infections.

Prolidase  Deﬁciency

Another  genetic  defect  that  can  be  a   determining  factor  in  SLE  is
prolidase  deﬁciency,  an  extremely  rare  disease  with  an  estimated
incidence  of  1  per  million  births.  Some  70  cases  have  been  reported
in   the  literature.  Its  inheritance  pattern  is  autosomal  recessive  and
it  is   characterized  by  chronic  skin  lesions,  splenomegaly,  peculiar
facies,  mental  retardation,  multisystem  involvement  (esophageal,
pulmonary),  iminodipeptiduria  and  elevated  immunoglobulin  lev-
els,  especially  IgE.  Prolidase  is   a   ubiquitously  distributed  dipeptide
involved  in   the  last  stages  of  degradation  of  endogenous  and  dietary
proteins.61–65 It   is   essential  in   collagen  catabolism  as  it  is  involved
in  the  hydrolysis  of  peptides  containing  proline  or   hydroxypro-
line.  The  hypotheses  concerning  the  pathogenesis  point  to  changes
in   connective  tissue  metabolism  that  produce  angiopathy  or  a
change  in  C1q,  which  contains  high  amounts  of  proline.  There  is
documented  evidence  of  an  important  role  of  prolidase  in  the  matu-
ration  and  activation  of  the  type  I  IFN  receptor.  The  susceptibility  of
these  patients  to  recurrent  infections  (pneumonias,  sinusitis,  otitis
and  CMV   and  herpes  virus  infections)  is   attributed  to   the  alter-
ation  in  the  expression  of  this  receptor.  The  deﬁnitive  diagnosis  is
based  on  the  documentation  of  the  mutation  in   the  PEPD  gene.  The
most  frequently  reported  dermatological  manifestations  are  recal-
citrant  skin  ulcers  on  the  legs,  in   addition  to  telangiectasias  and
photosensitivity.61 Onset  can  occur  from  birth  to  the  age  of  22  years.
There  are  reports  of  patients  with  this  defect  with  hypocomple-
mentemia  and  positive  tests  for  anti-dsDNA  and  anti-Sm  antibody,
which  are  characteristic  of  SLE.  This  diagnosis  should  be  considered
in   patients  with  SLE  and  recurrent  infections,  facial  dysmorphia,
developmental  delay,  skin  lesions  and  elevated  IgE  level.61–65

Lupus  and  Hypogammaglobulinemia

Patients  with  SLE  typically  have  hypergammaglobulinemia.66
Rankin  and  Isenberg67 have  reported  that  up   to   5%  of  the  SLE
patients  have  selective  IgA  deﬁciency.  Patients  with  SLE  can  have
concomitant  antibody  deﬁciency  or   develop  it  later  on.  It  is   impor-
tant  to   determine  whether  there  is  renal  loss  of  IgG  secondary  to
nephrotic  syndrome.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  a   number  of
cases  associated  with  the  presence  of  common  variable  immuno-
deﬁciency.  This  disease  is   the  most  common  of  the  symptomatic
primary  immunodeﬁciencies,  and  the  diagnosis  is  based  on  the
decrease  in  IgG  levels,  but  in   IgA  and/or  IgM  levels  as  well  (in
contrast  to  the  renal  losses,  in  which  only  IgG  decreases),  with  an
alteration  in  speciﬁc  antibody  production  of.68–71

Hypocomplementemic  Urticarial  Vasculitis

Hypocomplementemic  urticarial  vasculitis  is   characterized  by
recurrent  urticarial,  cutaneous  vasculitis,  arthritis  and  glomeru-
lonephritis.  It  is   reported  to  be  associated  with  SLE  in  more  than
50%  of  the  cases.  Onset  is   usually  in  the  third  and  fourth  decades  of
life.  The  particular  characteristics  of  this  disease  are  uveitis,  episcle-
ritis,  recurrent  abdominal  pain  and  severe  glomerulonephritis  with
low  C1q  and  anti-c1q  antibody  levels.  There  continues  to   be   debate
as  to  whether  to   consider  this  disease  as  a  separate  entity  or   a   par-
ticular  subtype  of  SLE.  It  is   associated  with  mutations  in   DNASE1L3
(loss-of-function)  in  a   family  with  3  affected  children.72 The  protein
encoded  by   DNASE1L3  is  homologous  to   DNase-1  and  behaves  like
an  endonuclease,  degrading  DNA.  This  is  responsible  for  removing

278

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /   Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

DNA  from  nuclear  antigens.  Notably,  the  patients  reported  to  have
the  mutation  met   criteria  for  SLE.73 Anti-C1q  antibodies  were  found
in  all  of  them,  whereas  in  SLE,  they  are  present  in   only  30%  to  35%
of  the  patients.  In  our  experience,  intravenous  immunoglobulin,
in  combination  with  the  standard  treatment,  has  been  an  effective
therapeutic  option.74 The  whole  conceptual  controversy  surround-
ing  this  disease  is  one  more  argument  in   support  of  the  hypothesis
of  the  existence  of  several  subtypes  of  lupus.

Other  Immunodeﬁciencies

DOCK8  deﬁciency  is   a   determining  factor  in  what  is   known  as
autosomal  recessive  hyper-IgE  syndrome,  susceptibility  for  viral,
bacterial,  fungal  and  protozoan  infections,  in  addition  to  atopic
diseases  with  elevated  IgE  levels.

DOCK8  is  normally  expressed  in   cells  of  the  immune  system
and  determines  several  effects  on  the  lymphocytes.  The  loss  of
DOCK8  expression  causes  defects  in  T-cell  proliferation  and  the
production  of  antiviral  cytokines,  and  a  decrease  in  interleukin
(IL)-17  (important  in  the  defense  against  fungi).  It   also  is   deter-
minant  in  an  increase  in   the  production  of  cytokines  associated
with  the  Th2  immune  response,  with  eczema  and  eosinophilia.
The  patients  show  clinical  signs  of  susceptibility  to  viral  infections
(especially  cutaneous  infections,  herpes,  verrucae  and  mollus-
cum  contagiosum)  and  autoimmunity  (vasculitis,  autoimmune
hemolytic  anemia).75–78

There  are  reports  of  3  cases  of  SLE  associated  with  hyper-IgE
syndrome  in  pediatric  populations.75–77 The  ﬁrst  patient  was   an
11-year-old  Asian  boy  who   had  been  diagnosed  with  hyper-IgE
syndrome  at  the  age  of  6  months.  The  second  patient  was  a   5-year-
old  girl,  the  daughter  of  consanguineous  parents,  with  a   history
of  herpetic  blepharitis,  pyodermitis,  eczema,  recurrent  pneumonia
and  purulent  otitis  media,  with  elevated  IgE  levels  and  DOCK8  deﬁ-
ciency.  She  developed  arthritis,  discoid  lupus,  purpuric  lesions  on
the  skin  that  was  exposed  to   the  sun,  positive  tests  for  ANA  and
anti-dsDNA  antibodies  and  a   skin  biopsy  consistent  with  chronic
lupus  erythematosus.  She  was  treated  with  hydroxychloroquine
and  antibody  prophylaxis  and,  at  the  time  of  the  publication  of
the  her  case,  stem  cell  transplantation  was  planned.  Several  years
ago,   we  reported  the  case  of  a  third  patient,  a   10-year-old  Mexican
girl  with  hyper-IgE  syndrome,  SLE  and  secondary  antiphospho-
lipid  syndrome  (cerebral  infarction);  the  patient  had  recurrent
infections.76,77

Patients  with  chronic  granulomatous  disease  (CGD)  and  moth-
ers  who  are  carriers  of  the  disease  are  predisposed  to  the
development  of  several  forms  of  lupus.79–81 One  hypothesis  to
explain  this  phenomenon  involves  defective  neutrophil  apoptosis
with  production  of  autoantibodies.81 Chou  et  al.82 report  a   patient,
the  daughter  of  consanguineous  parents,  with  chronic  diarrhea
and  arthralgia,  who  developed  SLE  at  the  age  of  8  years.  She  had
hepatosplenomegaly,  elevated  transaminase  levels,  autoimmune
hemolytic  anemia,  and  positive  tests  for  ANA  and  anti-dsDNA  anti-
bodies.  Whole  exome  sequencing  enabled  the  identiﬁcation  of  a
mutation  in  NCF2  of  the  NADPH  oxidase  complex  (CGD).

Single-gene  diseases  predisposing

to  autoimmunity  have
recently  been  recognized.  Mutations  in   RAG1  and  RAG2  in  humans
result  in  a  wide  spectrum  of  phenotypes,  from  the  absence  of  T  cells
and  B  cells  with  severe  combined  immunodeﬁciency  to  late  autoim-
mune  disease  or  granulomas.  The  autoimmune  phenotype  can  vary
widely,  from  cytopenias  to   destructive  vasculitis.  Loss  of  tolerance
is  due  to  altered  lymphocyte  receptor  editing,  and  patients  with
RAG  deﬁciency  have  been  reported  to   produce  a  considerable  vari-
ety  of  autoantibodies,  including  those  characteristic  of  SLE.83 It   is
important  that  we   point  out  that  patients  with  this  disease  pro-
duce  anti-IFN  antibodies,  and  this  is  associated  with  severe  viral

infections.  These  same  anti-IFN  antibodies  have  been  found  in   SLE
patients.84 The  case  of  a  44-year-old  woman   with  mutations  in
RAG2  and  SLE  was  recently  described.  She  had  polyarthritis,  Ray-
naud’s  phenomenon,  sicca  symptoms,  serositis,  rash  and  nephritis,
in  addition  to  hypocomplementemia  and  positive  tests  for  anti-Sm,
anti-RNP,  anti-Ro  and  anti-dsDNA  antibodies.85 Curiously,  not  only
did  she  have  T-cell  lymphopenia,  but  B-cell  lymphopenia  as  well,
and  recurrent  infections.  There  are  also  reports  of  SLE  patients  with
mutations  in  FasL.  Wu  et  al.86 described  the  case  of  one  such  patient
and  suggest  that  this  entity  be  considered  in   patients  with  SLE
and  marked  lymphadenopathy  (in  addition  to   the  aforementioned
conditions).  We   have  observed  a   case  of  Mendelian  susceptibility
to   mycobacterial  disease  (an  IL-12  receptor  beta  chain  defect),  in
which  the  patient  also  had  tuberculous  meningitis  and  SLE.87 This
association  is   noteworthy  because,  contradictorily,  in  animal  mod-
els,  IL-23  receptor  deﬁciency  protects  against  the  development  of
SLE.88 Although  autoimmune  phenomena  are   common  in  patients
with  Wiskott-Aldrich  syndrome,  only  1  case  associated  with  SLE
has  been  described.89

in  which  autoimmunity

Polymorphisms  in  cytotoxic  T   lymphocyte  antigen-4  (CTLA-4),
a  primordial  regulatory  protein  of  the  immune  response,  have  been
reported  in   SLE  patients.90 Loss  of  CTLA-4  is   fatal  in  mice.  On  the
other  hand,  there  are  families  diagnosed  with  an  immunodeﬁciency
syndrome
is  produced  by  heterozy-
gous  mutations  in  CTLA-4.91,92 Although  the  patients  were  not
diagnosed  with  lupus,  they  had  severe  autoimmunity,  with  cytope-
nias,  enteropathy  and  granulomatous  pulmonary  inﬁltrate.  They
also  had  recurrent  infections  and  hypogammaglobulinemia.91,92
Patients  with  CTLA-4  haploinsufﬁciency  are  expected  to  bene-
ﬁt  from  soluble  CTLA-4  fusion  proteins  (abatacept  and  betacept),
which  inhibit  immune  activation.  Abatacept  has  been  shown  to
have  some  effect  in  SLE,  although  the  ﬁndings  are  inconsistent.93
Thus,  in  the  future,  the  documentation  of  the  particular  defect  in
each  lupus  patient  could   help  to  guide  the  treatment  more  coher-
ently.

Finally,  early-onset  Evans  syndrome  (hemolytic  anemia  and
immunodeﬁciency  and  pre-
immunosenescence  has  been  found  to  be   related  to

thrombocytopenic  purpura)  with
mature
tripeptidyl-peptidase  II  deﬁciency.94

Conclusions

There  are  a   number  of  differences  between  SLE  and  pSLE,  mainly
in   terms  of  chronicity,  severity  and  the  association  with  PID,  a
circumstance  that  suggests  the  possibility  that  SLE  and  pSLE  are
different  in   many  aspects.

It  could  be  that  early-onset  SLE  is  not  a  single  disease,  but  occa-
sionally  comprises  a  heterogenic  group  of  different  single-gene
defects  associated  with  susceptibility  to   infections  and  involving
different  organs.95

As   the  manifestations  of  PID  continue  to  be   described,  the  ﬁnd-
ings  include  an  increasing  number  of  hypomorphic  mutations  that
may   cause  PID  with  a   milder  phenotype  and  onset  in  adulthood.  It
could  be  that  the  same  occurs  with  the  defects  encountered  in  SLE
(or  that  different  novel  mutations  are  to   be  found).96

immune  response

impact  on  the  development  of  SLE  and

The  association  between  elevated  IFN  levels  and  changes  in
the  Th17
is  an  area  under  study  because
important
its
therapeutic  implications.17,21 Knowing  the  type  of  SLE  we   are
dealing  with  could  help
the  choice  of  a  better  guided
treatment  (intravenous  immunoglobulin,  anti-IFN(cid:2)  antibodies,
abatacept,  rituximab,  hydroxychloroquine,  antibiotic  prophylaxis
or  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation)  (Fig.  2).

its


Finally,  in  any  patient  with  severe  pSLE  associated  with  life-
threatening  or  recurrent  infections  or  infections  caused  by   less

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /  Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

279

IFN-alpha

Defects with
IFN-alpha overproduction

Complement deficiency

Defective
apoptosis
KRAS/NRAS
Protein kinase Cδ deficiency

LUPUS

Elevated
interferon-alpha

LUPUS

Low
complement levels
Recurrent infections

LUPUS

Defective
apoptosis

Standard
treatment

Guided
therapy

Anti-interferon-alpha
monoclonal
antibody

Intravenous
immunoglobulin
Plasmapheresis
Antibiotic
prophylaxis

Rituximab
Hydroxychloroquine
Hematopoietic
stem cell
transplantation

Fig.  2.   Example  of  different  lupus-like  diseases  that  involve  different  therapeutic  modalities.

common  microorganisms  (Pneumocystis  jiroveci,  tuberculosis,  can-
didiasis,  aspergillosis,  coccidiodomycosis,  CMV)  associated  with
extremely  low  complement  levels  and/or  parental  consanguinity,
the  approach  should  be  to   rule  out  the  presence  of  a   PID  that  could
have  an  effect  on  the  disease  course.23 Thus,  in   this  respect,  lupus  is
not  a  single  disease,  but  several  diseases  with  different  etiologies,
severities,  onsets  and  treatments.

Ethical  Disclosures

Protection  of  human  and  animal  subjects.  The  authors  declare
that  no  experiments  were  performed  on  humans  or  animals  for
this  study.

Conﬁdentiality  of  data.  The  authors  declare  that  no  patient  data
appear  in  this  article.

Right  to  privacy  and  informed  consent.  The  authors  declare  that
no  patient  data  appear  in   this  article.

Conﬂicts  of  Interest

The  authors  declare  they  have  no  conﬂicts  of  interest.

References

8.  Liphaus  BL,   Umetsu  N,  Jesus  AA,  Bando  SY,  Silva  CA,  Carneiro-Sampaio  M.
Molecular  characterization  of  the  complement  C1q,  C2  and  C4   genes  in  Brazil-
ian  patients  with  juvenile  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Clinics  (Sao  Paulo).
2015;70:220–7.

9.  Crow  J,  Yanick.  Lupus  How  much  ‘complexity’  is   really  (just)  genetic  heterogene-

ity?  Arthritis  Rheum.  2011;63:3661–4.

10.  Sullivan  K,   Winkelstein  J.  Deﬁciencies  of  the  complement  system.  In:   Stiehm  R,
Ochs  H,  Winkelstein  J,  editors.  Immunologic  disorders  in  infants  &   children.  5th
ed.  Philadelphia:  Elsevier  Saunders;  2004.  p.  652–84.

11.  Stegert  M,   Bock  M,   Trendelenburg  M.   Clinical  presentation  of  human  C1q  deﬁ-

ciency:  how  much  of  a   lupus?  Mol   Immunol.  2015;67:3–11.

12.  Kallel-Sellami  M,   Laadhar  L,   Zerzeri  Y,  Makni  S.  Complement  deﬁciency  and  sys-
temic   lupus  erythematosus:  consensus  and  dilemma.  Expert  Rev  Clin   Immunol.
2008;4:629–37.

13.  Gullstrand  B,  Mårtensson  U,  Sturfelt  G,   Bengtsson  AA,  Truedsson  L.   Complement
classical  pathway  components  are  all  important  in  clearance  of  apoptotic  and
secondary  necrotic  cells.  Clin  Exp   Immunol.  2009;156:303–11.

14.  Degn  SE,   Jensenius  JC,  Thiel  S.  Disease-causing  mutations  in  genes  of  the  com-

plement  system.  Am  J  Hum  Genet.  2011;88:689–705.

15.  Prodeus  AP,  Goerg  S,  Shen  LM,   Pozdnyakova  OO,  Chu  L,  Alicot  EM,  et  al.
A  critical  role  for  complement  in  maintenance  of  self-tolerance.  Immunity.
1998;9:721–31.

16.  Karsten  CM,  Kohl  J.  The  immunoglobulin.  IgG  Fc  receptor  and  complement  tri-

angle  in  autoinmune  diseases.  Immunobiology.  2012;217:1067–79.

17.  Casciola-Rosen  LA,   Anhalt  G,  Rosen  A.  Autoantigens  targeted  in  systemic  lupus
erythematosus  are  clustered  in  two  populations  of  surface  structures  on   apop-
totic   keratinocytes.  J   Exp  Med.  1994;179:1317–30.

18.  Jönsson  G,   Sjöholm  AG,  Truedsson  L,   Bengtsson  AA,  Braconier  JH,  Sturfelt  G.
Rheumatological  manifestations,  organ  damage  and  autoimmunity  in  heredi-
tary   C2  deﬁciency.  Rheumatology  (Oxford).  2007;46:1133–9.

19.  Jönsson  G,  Truedsson  L,   Sturfelt  G,   Oxelius  VA,  Braconier  JH,   Sjöholm  AG.
Hereditary  C2  deﬁciency  in  Sweden:  frequent  occurrence  of  invasive  infec-
tion,  atherosclerosis,  and  rheumatic  disease.  Medicine  (Baltimore).  2005;84:
23–34.

20.  Lipsker  D,   Hauptmann  G.  Cutaneous  manifestations  of  complement  deﬁciencies.

1.  Weiss  JE.  Pediatric  systemic  lupus  erythematosus:  more  than  a   positive  antinu-

Lupus.  2010;19:1096–106.

clear  antibody.  Pediatr  Rev.  2012;33:62–73.

2.  Tarr  T,  Dèrfalvi  B,  Gyóri  N,  Szántó  A,  Siminszky  Z,   Malik  A,  et   al.  Similarities  and
differences  between  pediatric  and  adult  patients  with  systemic  lupus  erythe-
matosus.  Lupus.  2015;24:796–803.

3.  Kamphuis  S,  Silverman  ED.  Prevalence  and  burden  of  pediatric-onset  systemic

lupus  erythematosus.  Nat  Rev   Rheumatol.  2010;6:538–46.

4.  Webb  R,  Kelly  J,  Somers  E.  Early  disease  onset  is   predicted  by   a  higher  genetic
risk   for  lupus  and  is   associated  with  a   more  severe  phenotype  in  lupus  patients.
Ann  Rheum  Dis.  2011;70:151–6.

21.  Troedson  C,   Wong  M,   Alby-Payne  J,  Wilson  M,   Dexter  M,  Rice  GI,  et  al.  Systemic
lupus   erythematosus  due  to  C1q  deﬁciency  with  progressive  encephalopathy,
intracranial  calciﬁcation  and  acquired  moyamoya  cerebral  vasculopathy.  Lupus.
2013;22:639–43.

22.  Van  Schaarenburg  RA,  Daha  NA,  Schonkeren  JJ,  Nivine  Levarht  EW,   van  Gijlswijk-
Janssen  DJ.  Identiﬁcation  of  a  novel  non-coding  mutation  in  C1qB  in  a  Dutch
child  with  C1q  deﬁciency  associated  with  recurrent  infections.  Immunobiology.
2015;220:422–7.

23.  Pettigrew  HD,  Teuber  SS,  Gershwin  ME.   Clinical  signiﬁcance  of  complement

5.  Levy  D,  Kamphuis  S.  Systemic  lupus  erythematosus  in  children  and  adolescents.

deﬁciencies.  Ann  N  Y  Acad  Sci.  2009;1173:108–23.

Pediatr  Clin  North  Am.   2012;59:345–64.

6.  Carneiro-Sampaio  M,  Liphaus  BL,  Jesus  AA,  Silva  CA,  Oliveira  JB,  Kiss  MH.  Under-
standing  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  physiopathology  in  the  light  of  primary
immunodeﬁciencies.  J   Clin  Immunol.  2008;28  Suppl.  1:S34–41.

7.  Jesus  AA,  Liphaus  BL,  Silva  CA,  Bando  SY,  Andrade  LE,  Coutinho  A,   et  al.  Com-
plement   and  antibody  primary  immunodeﬁciency  in  juvenile  systemic  lupus
erythematosus  patients.  Lupus.  2011;20:1275–84.

24.  Arkwright  PD,  Riley  P,  Hughes  SM,   Alachkar  H,  Wynn  RF.  Successful  cure  of  C1q
deﬁciency  in  human  subjects  treated  with  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplan-
tation.  J   Allergy  Clin  Immunol.  2014;133:265–7.

25.  Hauck  F,  Lee-kirsch  MA,   Aust  D,   Roesler  J,  Pessler  F.  Complement  C2   deﬁ-
ciency  disarranging  innate  and  adaptive  humoral  immune  responses  in  a
pediatric  patient:  treatment  with  rituximab.  Arthritis  Care  Res  (Hoboken).
2011;63:454–9.

280

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /   Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

26.  Kalliolias  G,  Ivashkiv  L.   Overview  of  the  biology  of  type  1  interferons.  Arthritis

Res   Ther.  2010;12:1–9.

27.  Bezalel  S,  Guri  K,  Elbirt  D,  Asher  I,  Sthoeger  ZM.   Type  1  interferon  signature  in

systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  IMAJ.  2014;16:246–9.

28.  Ramantani  G,  Kohlhase  J,  Hertzberg  C.  Expanding  the  phenotypic  spectrum
in  Aicardi-Goutières  syndrome.  Arthritis  Rheum.

lupus  erythematosus

2010;62:1469–77.

29.  Brkic  Z,  Corneth  O,  van  Helden-Meeuwsen  C.  T-helper  17  cell   cyokines  and  inter-
feron  type  1:  partners  in   crime  in  systemic  lupus  erythematosus?  Arthritis  Res
Ther.  2014;16:R62.

30.  Dolff  S,  Abdulahad  WH,   Kallenberg  CG.  Response  to   “T-helper  17  cell  cytokines
and   interferon  type  1:  partners  in  crime  in  systemic  lupus  erythematosus?”.
Arthritis  Res  Ther.  2014;16:409.

31.  Crow  YJ,  Manel  N.  Aicardi-Goutières  syndrome  and  the  type  I  interferonopathies.

Nat  Rev  Immunol.  2015;15:429–40.

32.  Aicardi  J,  Goutières  F.   Systemic  lupus  erythematosus  or  Aicardi-Goutières  syn-

drome?  Neuropediatrics.  2000;31:113.

33.  Aicardi  J,  Goutières  F.  A  progressive  familial  encephalopathy  in  infancy  with
calciﬁcations  of  the  basal  ganglia  and  chronic  cerebrospinal  ﬂuid  lymphocytosis.
Ann  Neurol.  1984;15:49–54.

34.  Lebon  P,  Badoual  J,   Ponsot  G,  Goutières  F,  Hémeury-Cukier  F,  Aicardi  J.   Intrathecal
synthesis  of  interferon-alpha  in  infants  with  progressive  familial  encephalo-
pathy.  J  Neurol  Sci.  1988;84:201–8.

35.  Crow  YJ,  Leitch  A,  Hayward  BE,  Garner  A,  Parmar  R,  Grifﬁth  E,  et   al.  Mutations
in  genes  encoding  ribonuclease.  H2  subunits  cause  Aicardi-Goutières  syndrome
and   mimic  congenital  viral  brain  infection.  Nat  Genet.  2006;38:910–6.

36.  Dale  RC,  Tang  SP,  Heckmatt  JZ,  Tatnall  FM.   Familial  systemic  lupus  erythemato-

sus  and  congenital  infection-like  syndrome.  Neuropediatrics.  2000;31:155–8.

37.  Lee-Kirsch  MA,   Gong  M,   Schulz  H,  Rüschendorf  F,  Stein  A,  Pfeiffer  C,  et   al.  Familial
chilblain  lupus,  a   monogenic  form  of  cutaneous  lupus  erythematosus,  maps  to
chromosome  3p.  Am  J   Hum  Genet.  2006;79:731–7.

38.  Lee-Kirsch  MA,   Chowdhury  D,   Harvey  S,  Gong  M,   Senenko  L,  Engel  K,   et   al.  A
mutation  in  TREX1  that  impairs  susceptibility  to  granzyme  A-mediated  cell
death  underlies  familial  chilblain  lupus.  J   Mol   Med   (Berl).  2007;85:531–7.
39.  Günther  C,  Meurer  M,   Stein  A,  Viehweg  A,  Lee-Kirsch  MA.   Familial  chilblain  lupus
—   a  monogenic  form  of  cutaneous  lupus  erythematosus  due  to  a   heterozygous
mutation  in  TREX1.  Dermatology.  2009;219:162–6.

40.  Ellyard  JI,  Jerjen  R,  Martin  JL,  Lee  AY,  Field  MA,   Jiang  SH,  et  al.  Identiﬁcation  of
a  pathogenic  variant  in  TREX1  in  early-onset  cerebral  systemic  lupus  erythe-
matosus  by  whole-exome  sequencing.  Arthritis  Rheum.  2014;66:3382–6.
41.  Rice  GI,  Rodero  MP,   Crow  YJ.  Human  disease  phenotypes  associated  with  muta-

tions  in  TREX1.  J   Clin  Immunol.  2015;35:235–43.

42.  Fredi  M,   Bianchi  M,   Andreoli  L,   Greco  G,  Olivieri  I,  Orcesi  S,  et  al.   Typing  TREX1
gene  in  patients  with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Reumatismo.  2015;67:1–7.
43.  Grieves  JL,  Fye  JM,   Harvey  S,  Grayson  JM,  Hollis  T,  Perrino  FW.   Exonuclease  TREX1
degrades  double-stranded  DNA  to  prevent  spontaneous  lupus-like  inﬂamma-
tory   disease.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A.  2015;112:5117–22.

44.  Van  Eyck  L,  de  Somer  L,  Pombal  D,   Bornschein  S,  Frans  G,  Humblet-Baron  S,
et  al.  A  brief  report:  IFIH1  mutation  causes  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  with
selective  IgA  deﬁciency.  Arthritis  Rheum.  2015;67:1592–7.

45.  Crow  YJ,  Chase  DS,   Lowenstein  Schmidt  J,  Szynkiewicz  M,   Forte  GM.  Charac-
terization  of  human  disease  phenotypes  associated  with  mutations  in  TREX1,
RNASEH2A,  RNASEH2B,  RNASEH2C,  SAMHD1,  ADAR,  and  IFIH1.  Am  J   Med   Genet
A.   2015;167:296–312.

46.  Jeremiah  N,  Neven  B,  Gentili  M,  Callebaut  I,  Maschalidi  S,  Stolzenberg  MC,
et   al.  Inherited  STING-activating  mutation  underlies  a   familial  inﬂammatory
syndrome  with  lupus-like  manifestations.  J   Clin  Invest.  2014;124:5516–20.
47.  McBride  J,  Jiang  J,  Abbas  A.   Safety  and  pharmacodynamics  of  rontalizumab  in

patients  with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Lupus.  2013;22:400–5.

48.  Lauwerys  B,  Ducreux  J,  Houssiau  F.  Type  1  interferon  blockade  in  systemic  lupus

erythematosus:  where  do   we  stand?  Rheumatology.  2014;53:1369–76.

49.  Kirou  K,  Gkrouzman  E.  Anti-interferon  alpha  treatment  in  SLE.  Clin   Immunol.

2013;148:303–12.

50.  Oliveira  JB,  Bidère  N,  Niemela  JE,  Zheng  L,  Sakai  K,  Nix  CP,   et   al.   NRAS  mutation
causes  a  human  autoimmune  lymphoproliferative  syndrome.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci
U   S  A.  2007;104:8953–8.

51.  Rauen  KA.  The  RASopathies.  Annu  Rev  Genomics  Hum  Genet.  2013;14:355–69.
52.  Takagi  M,   Shinoda  K,   Piao  J,  Mitsuiki  N,  Takagi  M,   Matsuda  K,   et  al.  Autoimmune
lymphoproliferative  syndrome-like  disease  with  somatic  KRAS  mutation.  Blood.
2011;117:2887–90.

53.  Bader-Meunier  B,  Cave  H,  Jeremiah  N.  Are  RASopathies  new  monogenic  predis-
posing  conditions  to  the  development  of  systemic  Lupus  erythematosus?  Semin
Arthritis  Rheum.  2013;43:217–9.

54.  Niemela  JE,  Lu  L,  Fleisher  TA,  Davis  J,  Caminha  I,  Natter  M,   et  al.  Somatic  KRAS
mutations  associated  with  a  human  nonmalignant  syndrome  of  autoimmunity
and   abnormal  leukocyte  homeostasis.  Blood.  2011;117:2883–6.

55.  Quaio  CR,  Carvalho  JF,  da  Silva   CA,  Bueno  C,   Brasil  AS,  Pereira  AC,  et  al.  Autoim-
mune  disease  and  multiple  autoantibodies  in  42  patients  with  RASopathies.  Am
J   Med   Genet  A.  2012;158:1077–82.

56.  Leventopoulos  G,  Denayer  E,  Makrythanasis  P,  Papapolychroniou  C,  Fryssira  H.
Noonan  syndrome  and  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  in  a  patient  with  a  novel
KRAS  mutation.  Clin  Exp  Rheumatol.  2010;28:556–7.

57.  Lopez-Rangel  E,  Malleson  PN,  Lirenman  DS,   Roa  B,  Wiszniewska  J,  Lewis  ME.  Sys-
temic  lupus  erythematosus  and  other  autoimmune  disorders  in  children  with
Noonan  syndrome.  Am  J   Med   Genet  A.  2005;139:239–42.

58.  Belot  A,  Kasher  PR,  Trotter  EW,   Foray  AP,  Debaud  AL.  Protein  kinase  C(cid:3)  deﬁciency
causes   Mendelian  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  with  B  cell-defective  apoptosis
and  hyperproliferation.  Arthritis  Rheum.  2013;65:2161–71.

59.  Kuehn  HS,   Niemela  JE,  Rangel-Santos  A,  Zhang  M,   Pittaluga  S.  Loss-of-function
of  the  protein  kinase  C(cid:3)  (PKC(cid:3))  causes  a   B-cell  lymphoproliferative  syndrome
in  humans.  Blood.  2013;121:3117–25.

60.  Kiykim  A,  Ogulur  I,  Baris  S,  Salzer  E,   Karakoc-Aydiner  E,  Ozen  AO,  et  al.  Potentially
beneﬁcial  effect   of  hydroxychloroquine  in  a  patient  with  a   novel  mutation  in
protein  kinase  C(cid:3)  deﬁciency.  J   Clin  Immunol.  2015;35:523–6.

61.  Shrinath  M,   Walter  JH,  Haeney  M,   Couriel  JM,   Lewis  MA,  Herrick  AL.  Proli-
dase   deﬁciency  and  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Arch  Dis  Child.  1997;76:
441–4.

62.  Di   Rocco  M,   Fantasia  AR,  Taro   M,   Loy  A,  Forlino  A,   Martini  A.   Systemic  lupus
erythematosus-like  disease  in  a   6-year-old  boy  with  prolidase  deﬁciency.
J   Inherit  Metab  Dis.  2007;30:814.

63.  Klar  A,  Navon-Elkan  P,  Rubinow  A,  Branski  D,   Hurvitz  H,  Christensen  E,  et   al.
Prolidase  deﬁciency:  it  looks  like  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  but  it  is  not.
Eur   J  Pediatr.  2010;169:727–32.

64.  Butbul  Aviel  Y,  Mandel  H,  Avitan  Hersh  E,  Bergman  R,  Adiv  OE,  Luder  A,  et  al.
Prolidase  deﬁciency  associated  with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  (SLE):  sin-
gle  site  experience  and  literature  review.  Pediatr  Rheumatol  Online  J.   2012;
10:18.

65.  Kurien  BT,  d’Sousa  A,  Bruner  BF,  Gross  T,  James  JA,  Targoff  IN,  et  al.  Proli-
dase   deﬁciency  breaks  tolerance  to  lupus-associated  antigens.  Int   J   Rheum  Dis.
2013;16:674–80.

66.  Jesus  A,  Liphaus  B,   Silva  C,   Bando  SY,  Andrade  LE,  Coutinho  A,  et   al.  Complement
and  antibody  primary  mmunodeﬁciency  in  juvenile  systemic  lupus  erythemato-
sus  patients.  Lupus.  2011;20:1275–84.

67.  Rankin  EC,  Isenberg  DA.  IgA  deﬁciency  and  SLE:  prevalence  in  a  clinic  population

and   a  review  of  the  literature.  Lupus.  1997;6:390–4.

68.  Cassidy  JT,  Kitson  RK,  Selby  CL.   Selective  IgA  deﬁciency  in  children  and  adults

with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Lupus.  2007;16:647–50.

69.  Geneviève  M1,   Bonnet  F,   Michaux  C,  Geffroy  CE,  Vandenhende  MA,   Combe  C,
et  al.  Lupus  nephritis  associated  with  common  variable  immunodeﬁciency:
Favourable  outcome  with  intravenous  immunoglobulin  treatment  [artículo  en
francés].  Rev  Med  Interne.  2012;33:e31–3.

70.  Suyama  K,  Kawasaki  Y,  Abe  Y,  Watanabe  M,   Ohara  S,  Oikawa  T,  et  al.  Develop-
ment  of  common  variable  immunodeﬁciency  in  IgA-  and  IgG2-deﬁcient  patients
with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Pediatr  Nephrol.  2012;27:489–92.

71.  Fernández-Castro  M,   Mellor-Pita  S,  Citores  MJ,   Mu ˜noz  P,  Tutor-Ureta  P,  Silva
L,   et  al.  Common  variable  immunodeﬁciency  in   systemic  lupus  erythematosus.
Semin  Arthritis  Rheum.  2007;36:238–45.

72.  Al-Mayouf  SM,  Sunker  A,   Abdwani  R,  Abrawi  SA,  Almurshedi  F,   Alhashmi  N,  et  al.
Loss-of-function  variant  in  DNASE1L3  causes  a   familial  form  of  systemic  lupus
erythematosus.  Nat  Genet.  2011;43:1186–8.

73.  Ozc¸   akar  ZB,  Foster  J   2nd,  Diaz-Horta  O,  Kasapcopur  O,  Fan  YS,   Yalc¸  ınkaya  F,  et  al.
DNASE1L3  mutations  in  hypocomplementemic  urticarial  vasculitis  syndrome.
Arthritis  Rheum.  2013;65:2183–9.

74.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  MA,   Duran-McKinster

C,  Ramírez-Vargas  N,
Hernandez-Bautista  V.  Intravenous  immunoglobulin  therapy  for  hypocomple-
mentemic  urticarial  vasculitis  associated  with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus
in  a  child.  Pediatr  Dermatol.  2009;26:445–7.

75.  North  J,  Kotecha  S,   Houtman  P,  Whaley  K.  Systemic  lupus  erythematosus  com-

plicating  hyper  IgE  syndrome.  Br  J  Rheumatol.  1998;36:297–8.

76.  Jouhadi  Z,   Khadir  K,  Ailal  F,  Buayad  K,  Nadiﬁ  S,  Engelhardt  KR,  et  al.  Ten-year
follow-up  of  a   Dock8-deﬁcient  child  with  features  of  systemic  lupus  erythe-
matosus.  Pediatrics.  2014;134:e1458.

77.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  M,   Zaltzman-Girshevich  S,  Garcia  de  la  Puente  S,
De  Leon-Bojorge  B,  Espinosa-Padilla  S,  Saez-de-Ocariz  M,  et  al.   Hyper-
IgE  syndrome  and  autoimmunity
in  Mexican  children.  Pediatr  Nephrol.
2006;21:1200–5.

78.  Aydin  SE,  Kilic  SS,  Aytekin  C,  Kumar  A,  Porras  O,  Kainulainen  L,  et   al.  Inborn
errors  working  party  of  EBMT,  DOCK8  deﬁciency:  Clinical  and  immunological
phenotype  and  treatment  options  —   a  review  of  136  patients.  J  Clin  Immunol.
2015;35:189–98.

79.  Ben   Abdallah  Chabchoub  R,  Turki  H,  Mahfoudh  A.  Systemic  lupus  erythematosus
in  a  boy  with  chronic  granulomatous  disease:  Case  report  and  review  of  the
literature.  Arch  Pediatr.  2014;21:1364–6.

80.  Badolato  R,  Notarangelo  LD,  Plebani  A,  Roos  D.  Development  of  systemic  lupus
erythematosus  in  a  young  child  affected  with  chronic  granulomatous  dis-
ease  following  withdrawal  of  treatment  with  interferon-gamma.  Rheumatology
(Oxford).  2003;42:804–5.

81.  Sanford  AN,  Suriano  AR,  Herche  D,  Dietzmann  K,  Sullivan  KE.  Abnormal
apoptosis  in  chronic  granulomatous  disease  and  autoantibody  production  char-
acteristic  of  lupus.  Rheumatology  (Oxford).  2006;45:178–81.

82.  Chou  J,  Hsu  JT,  Bainter  W,  al-Attiyah  R,  al-Herz  W,   Geha  RS.  A  novel  mutation  in
NCF2  associated  with  autoimmune  disease  and  a  solitary  late-onset  infection.
Clin   Immunol.  2015;161:128–30.

83.  Walter  JE,  Rosen  LB,  Csomos  K,   Rosenberg  JM,   Mathew  D,  Keszei  M,  et   al.  Broad-
spectrum  antibodies  against  self-antigens  and  cytokines  in  RAG  deﬁciency.  J   Clin
Invest.  2015;125:4135–48.

84.  Slavikova  M,   Schmeisser  H,  Kontsekova  E,  Mateicka  F,   Borecky  L,  Kontsek  P.
Incidence  of  autoantibodies  against  type   I  and  type  II  interferons  in  a  cohort  of
systemic  lupus  erythematosus  patients  in  Slovakia.  J   Interferon  Cytokine  Res.
2003;23:143–7.

F.  Rivas-Larrauri,  M.A.  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  /  Reumatol  Clin.  2016;12(5):274–281

281

85.  Walter  JE,  Lo  MS,  Kis-Toth  K,  Tirosh  I,  Frugoni  F,  Lee  YN,  et  al.  Impaired  recep-
tor  editing  and  heterozygous  RAG2  mutation  in  a  patient  with  systemic  lupus
erythematosus  and  erosive  arthritis.  J  Allergy  Clin  Immunol.  2015;135:272–3.

91.  Kuehn  HS,  Ouyang  W,   Lo  B,  Deenick  EK,  Niemela  JE,  Avery  DT,  et  al.  Immune  dys-
regulation  in  human  subjects  with  heterozygous  germline  mutations  in  CTLA4.
Science.  2014;345:1623–7.

86.  Wu  J,  Wilson  J,  He  J,  Xiang  L,  Schur  PH,  Mountz  JD.  Fas  ligand  mutation  in  a
patient  with  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  and  lymphoproliferative  disease.
J   Clin  Invest.  1996;98:1107–13.

92.  Schubert  D,  Bode  C,   Kenefeck  R,  Hou  TZ,  Wing  JB,   Kennedy  A,  et  al.  Autosomal
dominant  immune  dysregulation  syndrome  in  humans  with  CTLA4  mutations.
Nat   Med.  2014;20:1410–6.

87.  Ramirez-Alejo  N,  Blancas-Galicia  L,  Yamazaki-Nakashimada  M,   García-
Rodríguez  SE,  Rivas-Larrauri  F,  Paolo-Cienfuegos  DP,  et  al.  Molecular  analysis
for   patients  with  IL-12  receptor  (cid:4)1   deﬁciency.  Clin  Genet.  2014;86:161–6.
88.  Kyttaris  VC,  Zhang  Z,  Kuchroo  VK,  Oukka  M,   Tsokos  GC.  Cutting  edge:  IL-23
receptor  deﬁciency  prevents  the  development  of  lupus  nephritis  in  C57BL/
6-lpr/lpr  mice.  J   Immunol.  2010;184:4605–9.

89.  Monteferrante  G,   Giani  M,   van  den  Heuvel  M.   Systemic  lupus  erythematosus
and  Wiskott-Aldrich  syndrome  in  an   Italian  patient.  Lupus.  2009;18:273–7.
90.  Zhai  JX,  Zou  LW,  Zhang  ZX,   Fan  WJ,   Wang  HY,  Liu  T,   et  al.  CTLA-4  polymor-
phisms  and  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  (SLE):  a  meta-analysis.  Mol   Biol  Rep.
2013;40:5213–23.

93.  Furie  R,  Nicholls  K,   Cheng  TT,  Houssiau  F,  Burgos-Vargas  R,  Chen  SL,  et  al.  Efﬁcacy
and   safety  of  abatacept  in  lupus  nephritis:  a  twelve-month,  randomized,  double-
blind  study.  Arthritis  Rheum.  2014;66:379–89.

94.  Stepensky  P,  Rensing-Ehl  A,  Gather  R,  Revel-Vilk  S,  Fischer  U,   Nabhani
S,  et  al.  Early-onset  Evans  syndrome,
immunodeﬁciency,  and  premature
immunosenescence  associated  with  tripeptidyl-peptidase  II  deﬁciency.  Blood.
2015;125:753–61.

95.  Carneiro-Sampaio  M,   Coutinho  A.   Early-onset  autoimmune  disease  as  a   mani-

festation  of  primary  immunodeﬁciency.  Front  Immunol.  2015;6:185.

96.  Nelson  KS,   Lewis  DB.  Adult-onset  presentations  of  genetic  immunodeﬁciencies:

genes  can  throw  slow  curves.  Curr  Opin  Infect  Dis.  2010;23:359–64.